 MÖSSBAUER SPECTROSCOPY OF SOILS AND ROCKS AT GUSEV CRATER AND MERIDIANI PLANUM.  G. Klingelhöfer1, R. V. Morris2, B. Bernhardt1,3, C. Schröder1, D. Rodionov1,4, P.A. de Souza Jr.1,5, A. Yen6, F. Renz1, T. Wdowiak7, S. Squyres8 and the Athena Science Team. 1Institut für Anorganische und Analytische Chemie, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität, Staudinger Weg 9, 55128 Mainz, Germany (klingel@mail.unimainz.de), 2NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA, 3Von Hoerner und Sulger GmbH, Schwetzingen, Germany, 4Space Research Institute IKI, Moscow, Russia, 5CVRD Group, Vitoria, Brazil, 6Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA, 7University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA, 8Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.   Introduction: For the first time in history a Mössbauer spectrometer was placed on the surface of another planet. The miniaturized Mössbauer spectrometer MIMOS II [1] is part of the Athena payload of NASA's twin Mars Exploration Rovers (MER) "Spirit" and "Opportunity". It determines the Febearing mineralogy of Martian soils and rocks at the Rovers' respective landing sites, Gusev crater and Meridiani Planum. First results of soil and rock measurements at both landing sites confirm a generally basaltic composition of Martian surface materials.  Instrument design: MIMOS operates in backscatter geometry. Because of the complexity of sample preparation, this is the choice for an in situ planetary Mössbauer instrument. No sample preparation is required, the instrument is simply presented to the sample for analysis. Because of mission constrains for minimum mass, volume, and power consumption, the MIMOS II is extremely miniaturized (without loss in capability) compared to standard laboratory Mössbauer spectrometers and is optimized for low power consumption and high detection efficiency. All components were selected to withstand high acceleration forces and shocks, temperature variations over the Martian diurnal cycle, and cosmic ray irradiation. Because of restrictions in data transfer rates, most instrument functions and data processing capabilities, including acquisition and separate storage of spectra as a function of temperature, are performed by an internal dedicated microprocessor and memory. The dedicated CPU is also required because most Mössbauer measurements will be done at night when the rover CPU is turned off to conserve power. High detection efficiency is extremely important in order to minimize experiment time. Experiment time is also minimized by using as strong a main 57Co/Rh source as possible. Physically, the MIMOS II Mössbauer spectrometer has two components that are joined by an interconnect cable: the sensor head and electronics printedcircuit board. On MER, the sensor head is located at the end of the IDD and the electronics board is located in an electronics box inside the rover body. The sensor head contains the electromechanical transducer (mounted in the center), the main and reference 57Co/Rh sources, multilayered radiation shields, detectors and their preamplifiers and main (linear) amplifiers, and a contact plate and sensor. The contact plate and sensor are used in conjunction with the IDD to apply a small preload when it places the sensor head, holding it firmly against the target. The electronics board contains power supplies/conditioners, the dedicated CPU, different kinds of memory, firmware, and associated circuitry for instrument control and data processing.   First results and discussion: The first three Mössbauer spectra from the planet Mars were acquired from a soil spot in Gusev crater, just after Spirit had driven off the lander platform, from the rock Adirondack in Gusev crater, and from a soil spot at the bottom of the ~20 m crater which Opportunity landed in at Meridiani Planum. All three spectra show a basaltic mineral composition. Comparing the soil spectrum from Gusev crater (Figure 1) with the spectrum from the rock Adirondack (Figure 2) reveals a similar mineralogical composition, comprising of the dominant forsteritic olivine Fe2+ doublet [2], a second silicate Fe2+-doublet, and less intense Fe3+-doublet. We tentatively assign the second Fe2+-doublet to pyroxene, but further investigation is necessary to confirm this identification. The rock spectrum shows two small additional sextets, indicative of the mineral magnetite or low-Ti magnetite. This mineral seems to be absent in the soil. However, the rock spectrum came from a 12 h integration and shows good counting statistics whereas the soil spectrum, a 3 h integration, has poor counting statistics. Thus, we simply might not be able to see the magnetite in this noisy background. The ratio of ferric to ferrous iron also differs in the rock and the soil spectrum. Fe2+/FeTotal is ~0.6 in the soil sample and ~0.8 in the rock. Thus, as expected, the amount of ferric Fe is higher in the soil than in the rock. Pancam images of Adirondack revealed a dust coating and/or alteration rind on the rock. Planned activities on Adirondack include using the rock abrasion tool (RAT) to first brush off the dust, and then abrade a possible rock coating. Mössbauer spectra taken after each of these operations will offer further clarification of the differ ences between rock and soil components at Gusev crater. The first spectrum of soil at Meridiani Planum, taken at the bottom of the crater Opportunity landed in, again shows a similar pattern of three central doublets. (Figure 3). The dominant phase is again an olivine Fe2+ doublet accompanied by a second Fe2+-silicate phase and a Fe3+-phase. In addition, we see a weak sextet, which agrees well with the Mössbauer parameters of hematite. However, since the sextet is very weak and the linewidths are broad, we do not want to make a mineralogical assignment yet. We note, however that this spectrum is consistent with the Mini-TES result that the soil in this area has a very low hematite index.   Figure 1.  Mössbauer spectrum of soil in Gusev crater.   Figure 2. Mössbauer spectrum of Adirondack rock in Gusev crater.   Figure 3. Mössbauer spectrum of soil near the lander in Meridiani Planum.   Conclusions: The first Mössbauer measurements on Mars confirm the general basaltic nature of Martian surface materials. All Mössbauer spectra are dominated by the mineral olivine. Olivine has also been detected in the Nilli Fosse region from orbit by the Mars Global Surveyor Thermal Emission Spectrometer [3]. Detection of olivine at three widely spaced locations on Mars implies its widespread occurrence on the planet and the inefficiency of alteration processes (at least in recent times) that would act to reduce this highly-alterable mineral to weathering products. Only minor amounts of magnetically split ferric components were detected in the first spectra. Because of the presence of magnetite (possibly containing Ti), the Mössbauer spectrum of Adirondack is unlike that for any bulk sample of known SNC meteorite [4]. From our observations, soils seem to be derived from basaltic rocks. We do not see a mineral assemblage (e.g., higher proportion of ferric minerals) indicative of lacustrine deposits as of today (2004.02.09).  References: [1] Klingelhöfer G. et al. (2003) JGR 108(E12), 8067; [2] de Souza, P, unpublished database; [3] Hoefen et al., Science, 302, 627,2003; [4] Morris, R. V., unpublished database.  
