 RESULTS OF ROVER LOCALIZATION AND TOPOGRAPHIC MAPPING FOR THE 2003 MARS EXPLORATION ROVER MISSION.  R. Li1, S. W. Squyres, R. E. Arvidson, J. Bell, L. Crumpler, D. J. Des Marais, K. Di1, M. Golombek, J. Grant, J. Guinn,  R. Greeley, R. L. Kirk, M. Maimone, L. H. Matthies, M. Malin, T. Parker, M. Sims, L. A. Soderblom, J. Wang1, W. A. Watters, P. Whelley, F. Xu1, and the Athena Science Team. 1The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 43210 (li.2@osu.edu).   Introduction: Localization of Spirit and Opportunity Rovers and landing site topographic information are of fundamental importance to understanding where the rovers traversed and where and how to get the vehicles to new locations [1]. During the Mars Exploration Rover (MER) mission, The Ohio State University (OSU) team, collaborating with JPL and other institutions and organizations, has been routinely producing topographic maps, rover traverse maps, and updated rover locations to support tactical and strategic operations. These maps and localization data have been provided to MER mission scientists and engineers through a Web GIS and proved very valuable to engineering operations and science applications.  Localization of Landers: Localization of both landers was accomplished within eight days of landing (before the rovers egressed the landers). The procedure includes a) tracking the landers through UHF two-way Doppler positioning in the inertial reference frame, b) reconstructing the entry, descent and landing (EDL) process using DIMES descent images, and finally c) cartographic triangulation through features identifiable in both the first set of panoramas of rover images (Pancam and Navcam) and orbital images (MOC NA) in the Mars bodyfixed (MBF) coordinate system and the landing site local (LSL) reference systems. The optimal locations of Spirit and Opportunity landers are [14.5692°S, 175.4729°E] and [1.9462°S, 354.4734°E] respectively, respectively [2]. Rover Localization: Rover localization has been conducted at several levels using different technologies [3, 4]. On-board rover localization is primarily performed by the Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU), wheel-odometry, and sun-finding techniques. In cases where the rover experiences slippage caused by, e.g., traversing on loose soils or steep slopes, particularly in a crater, the onboard visual odometry (VO) technique was applied. VO uses consecutive Navcam stereo pairs (<0.75 m) within a short traverse distance (e.g. <10 m). The bundle adjustment (BA) technique builds an image network containing all panoramas and traversing images along the traverse to achieve a high-accuracy solution of rover positions along the entire traverse. The telemetry data generated from on-board localization (including VO) is used as an initial approximation in the bundle adjustment. BA at Gusev Crater site was performed regularly by using full or partial Navcam panoramic images, and occasionally forward- and rear-looking Pancam images. Overall, after BA, two-dimensional accuracy is sub-pixel to 1.5 pixels and three-dimensional accuracy is tens of centimeters.  From Sol 6 to Sol 66, Spirit moved northeast from Columbia Memorial Station toward Bonneville Crater; from Sol 66 to Sol 86 the rover traveled along the crater rim; and, starting Sol 88, the rover began a long drive in southeast direction toward Columbia Hills; after reaching foothill on Sol 156, the rover has been climbing and exploring Husband Hill for over 200sols. In the first 106 sols, the relative traversing error reached 2.7% (20.62m position error over a distance of 775.7 m) with the  maximum of 9.7% on Sol 35. By Sol 348, the position error 46.61m over a traversed distance of 3537.91m, producing a relative error of 1.3%. For the Meridiani site, BA was conducted within Eagle crater (up to Sol 62) where Opportunity landed. Figure 1 shows the Opportunity rover traverse up to Sol 62. The accumulated difference reached 21 m, or 13% of the traversed distance. A maximum relative error of 21% occurred on Sol 56. The significant localization error was mainly contributed by wheel slippage when Opportunity traversed the crater wall on loose soils and steep slopes for 56 sols. This demonstrated that the BA was able to correct the significant localization errors.  On the way from Eagle crater to Anatolia, a data gap of 100 m made a BA-based traverse impossible.  After this gap, a translation was applied without BA so that large features, such as Fram crater and Endurance crater, when measured from the ground images and the georeferenced MOC NA images, are generally matched. This indicates that after exiting Eagle crater, the rover did not experience significant slippages as in Eagle crater. After entering Endurance crater, the rover traversed on very difficult crater wall and experienced significant slippages. Rover localization errors were corrected by comparing the features in ortho images at each rover location with a global ortho image that covers the entire crater.  A new translation was applied after egressing Endurance crater. Though not optimal, this adjustment strategy enabled us to provide the Opportunity traverse in a timely manner.  In addition to rover traverse maps (Fig.1), rover traverse vertical profiles (Fig.2) and rover traverse images (Fig. 3) were also generated based on BA results to present localization information from different viewpoints. On March 30, 2004  (Spirit's Sol 85) and August 18, 2004 (Spirit's Sol 223), MSSS acquired two MOC NA images, which show the Spirit actual track. We are currently comparing the track with the ground bundle adjusted rover traverse. The results will be presented at the conference. Topographic Mapping: Topographic products, such as DTM (digital terrain model), ortho images, and three-dimensional models were generated routinely at the stops of the two sites by using Pancam and Navcam images. The ortho images of Pancam typically cover an area of 60×60 m and those of Navcam cover an area of 30×30 m, both having a resolution of 0.01 m. Three-dimensional models were generated for craters, often superimposed with ortho images. Figure 4 shows the ortho image and 3D model of Eagle crater.  By Sol 354 of Spirit and Sol 335 of Opportunity, we generated timely topographic products including 88 orthophotos and DTMs, and five 3D crater models, as well as periodical rover traverse maps and vertical profiles. Applications: The topographic maps and rover localization data have been extensively used in tactical and strategic planning and operations. They have also been used to support various scientific investigations requested by scientists. Geologic characteristics, including impact craters and associated ejecta sheets, variations in apparent albedo and texture of the plains surface, and differences in surface thermophysical properties, have been compared and correlated between ground and orbital images. The localization data and site-by-site mapping enabled an accurate comparison of size, shape and distribution of geologic feature along the entire traverse. Furthermore, systematic surveys of wind-related features have been useful on Spirit for characterizing transportation and organization of sand and dust on the floor of Gusev Crater. By providing a consistent frame of reference, localization has enabled an accurate assessment of the orientation of wind-related features that are separated by more than 3km. References: [1] Arvidson R. et al. (2004) Science, 305, 821-824. [2] Parker, T. et al., (2004) 35th LPSC, #2189. [3] Li, R. et al. (2004) PE&RS, 70(1), 77-90. [4] Li, R. et al. (2005) PE&RS, 71, submitted. [5] Grant, J. A. et al. (2004) Science, 305, 807-810. [6] Crumpler, L. et al. (2004) Nature, submitted. [7] Greeley, R., et al. (2004) Science, 305, 810-813.  Figure 1. Opportunity rover traverse map up to Sol 62 (blue from telemetry; red from bundle adjustment).    Figure 2. Vertical profile of the Spirit rover traverse up to Sol 282 (blue from telemetry; red from bundle adjustment).   Figure 3. Spirit rover traverse image map (Sol 149 to Sol 344), up to Cumberland Ridge.    Figure 4. Ortho image (left) and three-dimensional model (right) of Eagle crater at Opportunity site. 
