 SUMMARY OF ROCK ABRASION TOOL (RAT) RESULTS PERTINENT TO THE MARS EXPLORATION ROVER SCIENCE DATA SET.  P. W. Bartlett1,2, L. E. Carlson1, P. C. Chu1, K. R. Davis1, S. P. Gorevan1, A. G. Kusack1, T. M. Myrick1, and J. J. Wilson1, and the Athena Science Team, 1Honeybee Robotics; 460 W. 34th St., New York, NY 10001; 2Bartlett@HoneybeeRobotics.com.   Introduction:  The Rock Abrasion Tool (RAT) serves as the sample preparation device on the Mars Exploration Rover (MER) science payload.  As an end-effector on the rover's robotic arm the RAT [1] grinds a circular spot on the order of millimeters deep into a rock face to remove surface fines and weathered layers, preparing the rock for imaging and spectral observations.  As of 5 January 2005, 12 grinding operations have been performed at Gusev Crater by Spirit and 22 at Meridiani Planum by Opportunity.      Basic Abrasion Properties:  Once the robotic arm places and loads the RAT onto a rock surface, the RAT affects high rotational speed face grinding.  A grinding bit with two diamond grain embedded phenolic resin pads rotates near 3000 RPM and feeds slowly in a circular path across the rock, creating the larger abrasion area.  The 45.5 mm outer diameter of the abrasion is a fixed aspect of the mechanism.   The overall depth of penetration varies with operation due to rock properties and available rover energy, typically no greater than 10 millimeters.  The depth of penetration also varies across the abrasion area due to the rock's original surface geometry and the RAT's approach angle.  Abrasion areas can be less than fully circular and can include irregular unabraded areas internally.  Often an overall depth is reported with a grind operation, describing the distance from the highest point on the original rock face within the circular grind area to the floor of the abrasion.     Fig. 2:  False color Pancam composite from Spirit of abrasion of 'Adirondack' Courtesy NASA/JPL/Cornell The abrasion area surface finish varies significantly with rock type.  Generally, conventional grinding produces surface roughness heights less than 1.5 microns.  Depending on rock types, grinding artifacts are at times evident, in the form of arcing scratches or swirls corresponding to the grinding wheel path of motion.    Fig. 3:  Microscopic image from Spirit of abrasion of 'Adirondack'   Courtesy NASA/JPL Cuttings.  During and after grinding the RAT clears cuttings from the abrasion area with brushes.  A brush bit moves with the grinding bit clearing the immediate abrasion area and a long perimeter brush pushes the accumulated  ring of cuttings away from the abrasion area if it forms.  Cuttings are prominent in post-grind imaging primarily as an even coating on the rock face nearby and as accumulated rings surrounding the abrasion area. Particle size analysis [2] performed on cuttings produced by grinding at 7 torr Earth atmosphere into a moderately hard Palisades basalt shows that roughly 91% of the cuttings by weight are of 5 - 90 microns in size.  The size fraction less than 5 microns is represented as 7 wt% and the fraction greater than 90 microns is represented at 2 wt%.   Rock types, grind depths, and grinding orientations with respect to gravity can effect the clearing of cuttings, leaving clumps or a coating on the abrasion floor.  The impact of subsequent in situ sensor observations can be apparent in the cuttings.  Marks left by the Mössbauer spectrometer and APXS contact mechanism plates are frequently evident as they compress cuttings or move cuttings into the hole.  Also, a roughly 2 millimeter hole is sometimes made in colPile-up rings  of cuttings Scrape mark caused by RAT contact mechanism (rare) Thin coating of cuttings Spots masked from cuttings by RAT contact mechanism Abrasion area Abrasion wall Inner pileup ring Outer pileup ring Abraded face Natural face Unabraded depression Natural fracture Fig. 1:  Diagram of grinding wheel path  lected cuttings by the Microscopic Imager's surface contact sensing rod.   Actuator Telemetry:  The RAT employs three actuators to affect grinding in a planetary arrangement.  Rotation of the bits about their centers, orbiting of the bits about the their common center, and plunging of the bits into the rock are each independently actuated.  The orbit motion is under closed loop control reacting to current draw by the bit rotation motor, effectively varying the orbit aggressiveness based on torque at the bit.  The plunge motion is performed in discrete steps once or twice per orbit revolution.  Data from the three actuators comprise the bulk of the RAT telemetry.  Time histories of motor position and current are recorded at a rate of either 1 or 2 Hz.  Temperature as measured by a sensor mounted on the plunge actuator and switch states of the contact mechanism are also included in the telemetry, as well as software states.  Rock Physical Properties:  Since the RAT performs a mechanical operation on a rock, deductions can be made about the rock's physical properties.  The energy required to grind away the rock is calculated, normalized by volume of rock removed, and interpreted alongside sensing data and ground testing results.   Grind energy index.  The energy consumed by the RAT's primary actuator while grinding a given rock, apart from losses such as frictional drag in the mechanism, is normalized to provide a representative specific grind energy in terms of Joules per cubic millimeter for each grinding operation.  The calculation is performed over the last 0.25 millimeter of a grinding operation, where it is possible to make an accurate estimate of the volume of rock removed.  A mosaic of Microscopic Imager images of the resulting abrasion area allows for a measurement of the area, and therefore a projection of abraded volume.  The resulting specific grind energy is considered an index of grindability.     Fig. 4: Diagram of rock volume measurement Physical properties conclusions.  An index such as grindability describes the performance of the device on the given material in a given environment.  Decoupling device and environment characteristics leaves a bulk description of the given material's physical properties, with respect to a grinding operation.  Deconvolving indications of separate standard rock physical property values such as that of shear strength from this bulk property is non-trivial, however possible, in conjunction with supporting rock observations and ground testing for comparison.  The standard physical property most closely linked with grindability is hardness.   Homogenous rock composition makes physical properties deductions much more straight forward.  Rocks comprised of multiple materials of different physical properties, especially with variation on spatial scales relevant to grinding, complicate analysis, requiring imaging and spectral analysis even more so for interpretation.     Spherules at Meridiani:  The rocks encountered by Opportunity containing spherules or "blueberries" created special cases in RAT performance.  In most cases the spherules require significantly more grind energy than the base rock and are evident in the RAT telemetry.  Once the base rock is ground away and a spherule is ground down to nearly hemispherical in shape, it is commonly unseated and thrown from the workspace.  This process leaves cavities either spherical in shape or more irregular as some base rock can remain attached to the spherule when it is ejected.   Sweeping of Fines without Grinding:  The functionality of the RAT allowing it to clear cuttings can be employed independently of grinding.  This sweeping operation removes unadhered or lightly adhered material, exposing the rock face for observation, primarily for the APXS, Microscopic Imager, Pancam, and Mini-TES.  Overlapping patterns are created to accommodate the larger Mini-TES field of view.    Fig. 5: Color Pancam composite from Spirit of swept pattern on 'Clovis'   Courtesy NASA/JPL/Cornell Arced scrape marks have been observed in some swept areas, coinciding with grinding bit and brush bit paths of motion.  As of 5 January 2005, 40 sweeping operations have been performed at Gusev Crater by Spirit and 8 at Meridiani Planum by Opportunity.       References:  [1] Gorevan S. P. et al. (2003) JGR, 108, 9-1 - 9-8. [2] Ming, D and Morris, R. (2002) Particle size analysis, unpublished. 
