 Sedimentary Facies, Subaqueous Sediment Transport, and Depositional Environment of the Burns Formation, Meridiani Planum.  J. P. Grotzinger1, (grotz@gps.caltech.edu), R. E. Arvidson2, J.F. Bell III3, B. C. Clark4, W.H. Farrand5, K. Herkenhoff6, J.R. Johnson6, A. H. Knoll7, E. McCartney3, S. M. McLennan8, J. Metz1., T. Parker9; J. Soderblom3, S. W. Squyres3, R. Sullivan3, .N. Tosca8, and the Athena Science Team, 1 Caltech; 2Washington University;  3Cornell University; 4Lockheed Martin Corporation; 5Space Science Institute;  6U.S.G.S., Flagstaff; 7Harvard University; 8SUNY, Stony Brook; 9JPL, Pasadena.  Introduction:  The bedrock stratigraphy and sedimentology at the Opportunity Landing Site, as observed at Eagle, Endurance, and Erebus Craters, shows a consistent pattern of eolian dune and interdune depositional environments [1,2].   Outcrop exposures of sedimentary rocks form a set of genetically related strata defined informally as the Burns formation.  This formation can be subdivided into lower, middle, and upper units which, respectively, represent eolian dune, eolian sand sheet, and mixed eolian sand sheet and interdune facies associations.  Collectively, these three units are at least 7 meters thick and define a "wetting-upward" succession which records a progressive increase in the influence of groundwater and, ultimately, surface water in controlling primary depositional processes[1-4].       Stratigraphy:  The Burns lower unit is interpreted as a dry dune field (though grain composition indicates an evaporitic source), whose preserved record of large-scale cross-bedded sandstones indicates either superimposed bedforms of variable size or reactivation of lee-side slip faces by episodic (possibly seasonal) changes in wind direction.  The boundary between the lower and middle units is a significant eolian deflation surface.  This surface is interpreted to record eolian erosion down to the capillary fringe of the water table, where increased resistance to wind-induced erosion was promoted by increased sediment cohesiveness in the capillary fringe.  The overlying Burns middle unit is characterized by finescale planar-laminated to low-angle-stratified sandstones.  These sandstones accumulated during lateral migration of eolian impact ripples over the flat to gently undulating sand sheet surface.  In terrestrial settings, sand sheets may form an intermediate environment between dune fields and interdune or playa surfaces.  The contact between the middle and upper units of the Burns formation is interpreted as a diagenetic front, where recrystallization in the phreatic or capillary zones may have occurred [2,3].  The upper unit of the Burns formation contains a mixture of sand sheet facies and interdune facies.  Interdune facies include wavy bedding, irregular lamination with convolute bedding and possible small tepee or salt-ridge structures.  Wedge-shaped cracks seen at Erebus crater taper downward and crosscut lamination may be desiccation or freeze cracks. Cm-scale festoon crosslamination is indicative of shallow subaqueous flows marked by current velocities of a few tens of cm/sec.  Most likely, these currents were gravity-driven, possibly unchannelized flows resulting from the flooding of interdune/playa surfaces.     Physical stratification:  Several stratification styles are present in the outcrops investigated by the Opportunity rover at Meridiani Planum.  These include planar lamination, lowangle cross-stratification, cross-bedding, ripple crosslamination, and crinkly and undulatory lamination.  Planar lamination and low angle stratification are well-developed in several locations, particularly at Slickrock and Shoemakers Patio in Eagle crater and at Karatepe in Endurance crater.  MI images at Slickrock show "pinstripe" lamination where individual laminae can be single-grain thick layers, suggestive of eolian sedimentation.  At Shoemaker's Patio, a single cross-bed set with thickness of 5-7 cm is preserved.  At Burns Cliff, in Endurance crater, a single cross-bed set of up to several meters thickness is preserved.  In contrast, ripple cross-lamination with festoon geometry is present at several locations within Eagle crater and is particularly abundant at Erebus crater, where it forms successions up to several of 10s of cm thick.  Festoon cross-laminae sets are 0.7 to 2.1 cm thick, and show distinctive truncated laminae with concave-up geometry.  At Erebus crater, the sets show clear evidence of climbing. Grain size appears to range from 0.1 to 0.8 mm in diameter.  Climbing ripple cross-stratification is also well developed at Erebus crater.  Hydrodynamic Interpretation: The cross-bedding preserved at Eagle crater suggests both eolian and subaqueous environments.  The set at Shoemaker's patio represents deposition from either subaerial or subaqueous dunes.  The thicker, meter-scale set at Burns Cliff is most consistent with transport by eolian dunes.  The abundance at all study sites of planar and low-angle lamination suggests eolian processes may have been dominant, possibly forming in response to the passage of impact ripples on an aggrading and moist depositional surface.  In contrast, the small-scale festoon cross-laminae at Eagle and Erebus craters are indicative of sediment transport in subaqueous ripples.  The reconstructed size of former bedforms is inferred to be only a few cm, and therefore inconsistent with eolian dunes which commonly have significantly larger minimum amplitudes.  Yet the cross-lamination is significantly larger and of differing geometry from the climbing translatent cross-strata produced by wind ripples.  Thus, the size of bedforms that produced the cm-scale cross-laminae preserved at Eagle crater occupies the spectral gap in the size distribution of eolian dunes and ripples.  A further clue to the likely subaqueous origin for Eagle cross-laminae is provided by their festoon geometry which requires that the reconstructed ripples have threedimensional geometry defined by highly sinuous crestlines.  In terrestrial settings such bedforms are known only to develop in subaqueous, subcritical flows, with velocities of less than one meter per second.  They are not known to develop in eolian deposits or in subaerial base surge deposits.  On Mars, the initiation of subaqueous sediment movement is expected to occur at velocities lower than on earth, by a factor of 1.34.  With respect to length scales, such as bedform dimensions, the scaling factor turns out to have the opposite sense so that, given dynamically similar flows, ripples on Mars might be larger by a factor of 1.34.  Neither of these rescaling effects influences the interpretation that cm-scale,  festoon cross-lamination at Eagle crater most probably requires sediment transport in subaqueous, low-velocity flows of 0.1 to 1.0 m/sec across the Meridiani plains. The presence of positive climb angles in some examples indicates sediment deposition during bedform migration.  These conditions could be met in a flow which undergoes a downcurrent decrease in transport rate where the near-bed velocity decreases.  In this situation, sediment can be transported to the site of deposition while bedform migration rates are slowing.      Terrestrial analogs:  The essential attributes of the Burns formation which must be explained by any depositional model are: its great lateral extent, for possibly hundreds of kilometers; its dune-interdune facies motif which shows a "wetting upward" trend; and its unusual mineralogy of lowpH sulfate evaporite minerals.  On Earth, there is no single analog which can account for this unique set of characteristics.  Instead, a hybrid model must be constructed which assimilates specific important characteristics [2].  Some smaller systems come close.  The Rio Tinto acid-water mineral precipitation system provides a good analog for the mineralogy; however, as a hydrothermal system it does not replicate the dune-interdune/playa setting of the Burns formation.  The Lake Eyre basin, Australia, provides a suitable scale model for the size of the Burns formation depositional system.  The preserved aerial extent of the Meridiani hematite deposit - assumed here to provide a constraint on the areal extent of the concretion-bearing Burns formation - is on the order of ~1.5 x 105 sq. km.  This is exceeded by the drainage area for the Lake Eyre basin, which is ~1.14 x 106 sq. km, but is greater than the area of the active ("Lake Eyre") playa, which has an area of just ~1.0 x 104 sq. km; this expanded to ~3.5 x 104 sq. km during the last pluvial period at 125 ka.  The Lake Eyre basin provides an attractive analog for the ancient Meridiani surface because of its enormous playa surface which lies adjacent to a significant dune field, supplied with sediment from deflation of the playa surface.  Furthermore, during times of expansion associated with flooding, the lake creates narrow waterways that lace through the interdune network, and these infiltration events may provide good analogs for the overland flow of water indicated by the Burns formation upper unit.  These several points of comparison make it a strong analog for the Burns formation.  However, the playa deposits were precipitated from normal pH waters, and the Eyre playa does not produce significant volumes of evaporite minerals during deflation of the playa surface.  Most playa-derived sediments in the adjacent dune field are composed of terrigenous minerals.  In contrast, although or much smaller area, the White Sands playa-dune system of New Mexico provides enough sediment to form a continuous cover of almost pure sulfate sand dunes.  Wetting and drying of the playa forms grains that are blown off the playa surface to accumulate as a broad, areally-extensive network of dunes and sand sheets.  Depositional model:  The Burns formation is interpreted to record wetting of the Martian surface, very likely related to a relative rise in the water table [2].  Figure 1 shows one possible scenario involving gradual rise and fall of the groundwater table.  This interpretation is based on the stratigraphic succession of facies relative to the position of the Wellington deflation surface, which echoes the classic patterns preserved in terrestrial eolian sequences that record water-table rise.  As discussed above, the Burns upper unit records damp to wet interdune conditions, and preservation of wet interdune facies in the rock record requires that sediments accumulate as the water table rises and as dunes migrate downwind.  The rise can be absolute, perhaps associated with climate change, or relative, due to subsidence of the sediment column through a fixed water table.      Figure 1.  Depositional model for Burns formation based on regional variations in the groundwater table, on the order of many tens of kilometers.  Repeated cycles of relative water table rise and fall predict development of stacked dune-interdune facies, which can be tested if thicker sections of strata are discovered, possibly at Victoria crater.   Acknowledgements: We are grateful to Emily Dean, Jon Proton, and Dmitry Savransky for help in Pancam operations.  References: [1] Squyres, S. W. et al. (2005) Science, 306, 1709-1714. [2] Grotzinger J. P. et al. (2005) EPSL, 240, 1172.  [3] McLennan, S. M. et al. (2005) EPSL 204, 95-121. [4] Squyres, S.W. et al. (2006) Nature, in press.   
