 SURFACE COATINGS AT MERIDIANI PLANUM, MARS. Z. A. Learner1, J. F. Bell III1, J. Farmer2, W. H. Farrand3, J. P. Grotzinger4, J. R. Johnson5, B. L. Jolliff6, A. H. Knoll7, S. M. McLennan8, S. W. Squyres1, and W. A. Watters9, 1Cornell University, Space Sciences Building, Ithaca, NY 14854, zoe@astro.cornell.edu, 2Department of Geological Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, 3Space Science Institute, Boulder, CO, 4Div. of Geological and Planetary Sci., California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 5U.S. Geological Survey, Flagstaff, AZ, 6Dept. Earth and Planetary Sciences, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, 7Botanical Museum, Harvard University, Cambridge MA, 8Dept. of Geosciences, State University of New York, Stony Brook, NY, 9Massachusetts Inst. of Technology, Earth, Atmos. & Planetary Sci., Cambridge, MA.   Introduction: At Eagle Crater, Meridiani Planum, the landing site of the rover Opportunity, exposed outcrop rocks of what is called the Burns Formation have been examined. They are found to be rich in salts, particularly sulfates. Similar compositions are found in the much larger Endurance Crater, which Opportunity explored at length. These and other observations suggest that liquid water played an important role in the formation and, locally, in the deposition, of minerals that comprise the sediments examined. Furthermore, these sedimentary rocks appear to have undergone subsequent chemical alteration due to groundwater action that re-saturated the rocks. This hypothesis is supported by evidence for concretion formation, dissolution, recrystalization and cementation. All these processes appear to predate the formation of the craters explored by the rover [1, 2]. However, other features appear to postdate formation of the craters, including rock surface coatings, and it is therefore of great interest how much of a role water played in their formation. In both craters, features were observed using the Panoramic Camera (Pancam) that appear to be coatings on the surfaces of some of the exposed outcrop rocks [3]. The coating material differs from the underlying outcrop rocks in both texture and photometric properties [3, 4]. In this study, the chemical compositions, determined by the Opportunity rover's Alpha Particle X-ray Spectrometer (APXS) [5], of these coatings are examined. The other critical instrument in this study is the Rock Abrasion Tool (RAT), which has been used to either lightly brush a surface, thus exposing a relatively dust- and soil-free surface to use the APXS on, or to grind away the top few millimeters exposing the relatively fresh interior [6]. The goal of this study is to determine if chemical data can be used to establish how these surface coatings formed and what role water may have played in their formation. Method: APXS measurements exist for four of the coatings visually identified using Pancam imagery. "Raspberry Newton" and "Shark Tooth," both in Eagle Crater, are unbrushed surface measurements, and therefore subject to contamination by dust and soil residue. Also, since no grind was done on these targets, nearby post-grind measurements had to be used for comparison with the rock interior. "Escher," in Endurance Crater, has a full three-spectra data set on the target "Kirchner":  one unbrushed spectrum, one postbrushing spectrum, and one post-grinding spectrum. Brushing with the RAT is often done to try and remove some of the dust and soil on the surfaces of rocks that can contaminate APXS measurements on rocks without removing the natural surface of the rock. The final target, "Lemon Rind," on the rock "Fruit Basket" on the plains south of Endurance Crater, was measured after being brushed and measured again after a very light grind. A deep grind into apparently uncoated rock right beside "Lemon Rind," called "Strawberry Rind," was used for comparison with the rock interior. Several measurements were also acquired on outcrop rocks throughout the Meridiani site that did not show visible evidence for being coated. The method in this study is to determine the unique elemental properties associated with the visual identification of coatings by comparing the APXS measurements of the coatings to those of apparently uncoated outcrop rocks. Specifically, differences between the coated surfaces and outcrop interiors will be compared to differences between apparently uncoated surfaces and their outcrop interiors, thus establishing the distinctive properties of coated surfaces as opposed to uncoated surfaces. Results: Comparison of the APXS spectra for brushed or unbrushed coated surface and the APXS spectra of the underlying or adjacent interior (postRAT grinding) reveals the surface composition is higher in Na and Cl, and lower in S. Fractional changes (surface/interior - 1) ranging from 0.1 to 1.2 (See Figure 1). This was initially thought to be the distinguishing feature of rock coatings. However, upon further examination it has been found that the same relationships are observed in all of the rocks of the upper Burns Formation, the stratigraphic unit exposed in Eagle Crater [1, 2]. All APXS comparisons of preRAT grinding to post-RAT grinding show the surface composition to be higher in Na and Cl and lower in S. There are also  fractional changes, generally less than 0.2, in other salt-related cations such as Ca, Mg, Mn, and especially the highly soluable Br, which fluctuates  wildly (fractional change anywhere from 0 to well over 1.0) from rock to rock but is usually higher on the sur -0.60 -0.40 -0.20 0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00 MnO MgO CaO Na2O SO3 Cl Br Fra cti on al C ha ng e i n R oc k S urf ac e v s. In te ri or Mojo2 Raspberry Newton Shark Tooth Figure 1. The fractional change in elemental composition of rock surface versus the interior. The abundances are determined from APXS spectra [5]. The fractional change is determined by dividing the surface abundance by the interior abundance and subtracting 1. "Mojo2" is a rock that showed no visible coating, while both "Raspberry Newton" and "Shark Tooth" where identified as coatings in Pancam images [3, 4]. All three surfaces display the signature of increased Na and Cl and decreased S.  face. This may imply small scale variations in the postdepositional aqueous alteration history. The possibility of dust or soil contamination as an explanation for this ubiquitous surface chemistry is ruled out because the Cl abundances observed in all these surfaces are higher than the abundances measured in dust and soil. The highest Cl abundance measured on undisturbed soil, which also consequently was dusty, is 0.8 percent by weight. "Shark Tooth" had a Cl abundance equal to this and all other rock surfaces studied had higher abundances. Only two rocks, "Escher" and "Gagarin," have a full three-spectra data set ("as is", brushed, and ground); "Escher" appears to be coated and "Gagarin" does not. In addition to both surfaces having the above mentioned chemical signature (elevated Na and Cl and depleted S), the signature is less pronounced in the post-brushing measurement than it is in the "as is" measurement. Discussion: Accounting for surface contamination effects, we conclude that the elevated Na and Cl / depleted S signature is best explained by aqueous alteration of the outcrop surfaces. This would imply that these are not coatings, ie. a layer of material deposited on the surface of the rocks, but rather a chemical alteration of the rock surface resulting in a weathering rind. There is also evidence of thin chemically altered coatings on the rocks at the Spirit rover landing site, Gusev Crater [7].  These coatings are well modeled by low pH weathering of Martian basalts, which are the dominant rock type at that site. If a similar model proves successful for the Meridiani rocks, this would indicate that chemical weathering is very wide-spread process. We hypothesize that ongoing wind erosion prevents the formation of a thick coating on exposed outcrops. The thin coating that remains is easily removed by brushing with the RAT. The may explain why brushing leads to lowered concentrations of the more soluble elements (Cl, S, and Br) on the surface. In this model, rocks covered by a thin layer of soil and/or dust are protected from erosion and so coatings that form while covered are thick enough to be visually identified. However, these are only revealed when the soil has been recently removed and erosion has not yet had enough time to remove the coatings. This is supported by many images from Shoemaker's Patio in Eagle Crater, where "Raspberry Newton" and "Shark Tooth" are located, showing visible coatings receding from the surface of the rock except where still covered by a little soil. This process could be slow and continual, and currently occurring. Once a rock is exposed, the rate of erosion may be just balanced with the rate of chemical alteration so that there is always a layer of altered material on bare rocks to thin to be visually detected. It is also possible this process could be quicker and intermittent, and we're observing the last remains of the most recent coating episode, as well as the recently exposed and still intact coatings from the same episode and/or previous episode(s). As discussed earlier, several lines of evidence indicate that liquid water was active at this site in its past. Since the hypothesized weathering process involves significant changes in the abundances of salts, water could also be involved. Considering that the rinds appear to post-date the formation of the craters, this would imply that either an event involving liquid water occurred after crater formation and thus more recently than previously proposed models [1, 2], or that the weathering involves atmospheric water vapor and could be an ongoing process. This investigation is ongoing and further modeling is needed for a more conclusive determination. References: [1] McLennan, S. M. et al. (2005) EPSL 240, 95-121, [2] Grotzinger, J. P. et al. (2005) EPSL 240, 11-72, [3] Farrand, W. H. et al. (2006) JGR in progress, [4] Johnson, J. R. et al. (2006) JGR  in progress, [5] Gellert, R. et al. (2005) LPSC no. 1997, [6] Gorevan, S. P. et al. (2003) JGR 108 doi:10.1029/2003JE002061, [7] Hurowitz, J. A. et al. (2006) JGR 111, doi:10.1029/2005JE002515.  
