 MINEALOGICAL UNITS IN THE COLUMBIA HILLS FROM MINI-TES.  D. L. Blaney1,  Phil Christensen2, Steve Ruff2, and  The Athena Science Team, 1NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, MS 183-501, Pasadena Ca, 91109, email: Diana.Blaney@jpl.nasa.gov,, 2Arizona State University, Tempe Az..  Introduction:  Since landing on Mars, the Spirit rover has examined a wide range of rocks and outcrops using the Athena Payload and the Miniature Thermal Emission Spectrometer [1].  The mid-infrared contains strong fundamental vibrational bands that permit mineralogy to be determined remotely and identify specific rock types and their distribution.  Details of the derived mineralogy for selected Mini-TES spectra are discussed in Ruff et al 2006 [2]. In exploring the Columbia Hills spectral classes for rock with similar mineralogy (spectra) were identified. Rocks / outcrops are then assigned to a class and variability within the class assessed.   In determining the spectral classes, both rock from outcrops and "float" (rocks that are sitting on the surface) are used. However, not all spectral classes have bedrock locations identified (e.g. Wishstone class) making identification of a source problematic. This work focuses on observations where member of a rock class has been seen as bedrock, allowing us to look for trends and relationships.  Approach: Spirit has been stopping to measure the mineralogy of most exposed outcrops while climbing and descending Husband Hill.  Mini-TES is used to identify locations were there is clear mineralogic variability and new rock types prior to using the Instrument Deployment Device (IDD) instruments (the Alpha Particle X-Ray Spectrometer (APXS), the Mossbauer Spectrometer, and Microscopic Imager (MI)). The IDD instruments require a long duration (several days) to acquire measurements from all the instruments on a single target.  Additionally, Mini-TES generally does a comprehensive survey of the outcrop to map variability and extent of the material while the rover is stopped to make arm movements.  This permits us to look for variability related to subtle difference in mineralogy with in the outcrop.  Key outcrops, locations, and Mini-TES spectral classes which have been identified to date are given in Table 1 with their location provided in Figure 1.  These outcrops are for the most part consistent with groupings by other instruments, but do not rely on those measurements for their origin—therefore there may be slight differences between the Mini-TES classes and other type of classes.  With the exception of Watchtower materials, most outcrops appear to be relatively homogenous with distinctive spectral signatures.  The rocks on the West Spur (Clovis) and the bedrock encountered driving up Husband Hill seem to be altered to some extent but do not have well crystalline clay spectral signatures. The lack of clay includes Assemblee which chemically has many similarities with montmorillonites [3].  Peace class materials have a strong bound water feature.  Table 1: Key Outcrops and Mini-TES Classes   Outcrop Location Mini-TES Spectral Class Clovis/ Tetl/ Uchben/ West Spur Clovis Peace/ Alligator Northwest Flank  Husband Hill Peace Methuselah/ Jibbsheet/ Larry's Lookout Cumberland Ridge Watchtower Independence / Assemblee Cumberland Ridge Assemblee Hillary Summit of Husband Hill Hillary Kansas Haskin's Ridge Kansas Larry's Bench Haskin's Ridge Larry's Bench  Algonquin/ Miami/Seminole Lower Haskin's Ridge Algonquin Comanche Lower Haskin's Ridge Comanche  In the Watchtower region (outcrops Methuselah, Jibbsheet, and Larry's Lookout) there is considerable variability at small scale, most likely due to a highly variable alteration process (see Figure 2).  Larry's Lookout and Jibsheet ridge show significant variability between the outcrops and within—although they have generally the same spectral character.  These outcrops are significantly different than the Methuselah outcrop.  These differences are not consistent with a source due to differences in dust coverage or atmospheric effects. Material from the summit region is also present in the vicinity of Watchtower as "float" presumably transported down from the summit by erosional processes.  Since reaching Lower Haskin's ridge spectral features due to olivine are present.  These new olivine-rich rocks indicate either a different source matieral, lesser amounts of alteration, or both. References: [1] Christensen et al. (2004), Science, 305, 837-842. [2] Ruff et al. LPSC 2006.  [3]Clark  et al  FALL AGU 2005. [4] Li et al. at LPSC 2006.     Figure 1.  Location of Outcrops measured by Mini-TES in the Columbia Hills corresponding the spectral classes discussed in Table 1.  Base map and reconstruction of Spirits traverse provided by the Ohio State University Mapping and GIS Laboratory using Mars Observer Camera Digital Elevation Models provided by the United States Geological Survey at Flagstaff, AZ (Li et al. 2006 [4]).   Figure 2. Mini-TES stares in the "Watchtower" region.  Locations of the spectra on the outcrop and the geogrpahic relationship between the outcrops are shown.  Methuselah spectra lack the slope between 600 and 350  cm-1.  The Larry's Lookout outcrop contains a wide degree of variability showing that alteration processes were highly localized.  
