 IS THE CHEMISTRY OF THE BEDROCKS AT MERIDIANI PLANUM INDICATIVE OF A VOLCANIC OR SEDIMENTARY/EVAPORITE ORIGIN?  T. M. McCollom and B. M. Hynek, Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, UCB392, University of Colorado, Boulder CO 80309.  mccollom@lasp.colorado.edu.   Introduction:  The Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity has obtained chemical and mineralogical data for exposed bedrocks at Meridiani Planum on Mars.  In using these data to formulate a diagenetic model for the bedrocks, a clear distinction must be made between the primary inputs into the rocks and products of secondary processes.   The chemical composition of the Meridiani bedrocks provides the most definitive constraint on the nature and origin of primary inputs.  In contrast, the current mineralogical composition of the rocks provides uncertain constraints on primary inputs because it is inherently ambiguous whether the minerals that are currently observed reflect primary inputs or secondary products created during diagenesis.  Thus, although it has been observed that the rocks mostly lack olivine and other igneous minerals, and may contain phyllosilicates and silica [1,2], neither of these observations provide constraints on the compostion of primary inputs since they may be products of secondary processes.     The MER science team has interpreted the Meridiani bedrocks as siliclastic sediments whose composition have been modified by two or more stages of evaporation of sulfate-bearing groundwater [1,2].  As described by McLennan et al. [2],  there are a series of chemical inputs into the rocks: (1) deposition of a siliclastic compnent as "basaltic mud," (2) cementation of this siliclastic component by sulfate salts from groundwater evaporation, followed by erosion, transport, and re-deposition by eolian and fluvial processes, and (3) cementation of the siliciclastic/salt grains by additional sulfate salts derived from one or more additional generations of groundwater evaporation. Based on our independent assessment  of their chemical composition, mineralogy, and geologic setting, we recently proposed that the Meridaini bedrocks were instead formed by volcanic processes [3].  In this scenario, the rocks were initially deposited as a series of volcanic ash flows of basaltic composition.  Following deposition, the ash deposits were permeated by SO2- and steam-rich volcanic vapors that altered the ash at elevated temperatures.  In this process, SO2 and H2O in the vapors combined to form sulfuric acid, which then reacted with the rocks, similar to the acidsulfate alteration observed in volcanic environments on Earth. During alteration, the original igneous minerals are replaced by alteration products including phyllosilicates (e.g., nontronite, saponite), amorphous silica, hematite and sulfate salts.  Morphological features such as cross and festoon bedding, interpreted by the MER team to result from eolian and fluvial processes [1,4], are also observed in base surge deposits in volcanic settings [3,5] and appear to be consistent with a volcanic scenario.  The scale of the deposits appears to be consistent with large volcanic deposits elsewhere on Mars [3]. Chemical constraints on bedrock origin:  A fundamental observation made by Oppurtunity is that the elmental compositions of all Meridiani bedrocks reported to date closely resemble typical martian basalt except for high abundances of S and O (Fig. 1) [1,2,6,7].  While some variation has been observed in the chemistry of the rocks in Endurance Crater, the range of compositions is small (Fig. 1) and predominantly reflects variations in Mg and S, with abundance of these components decreasing with depth in the section.  Any model for the origin of the rocks, therefore,  must reproduce a chemical composition that is enriched in S and O but otherwise identical to pristine martian basalt.   Jarosite AluniteSi + Al S Mg + Ca + Fe Hematite Meridiani bedrock Mars Meteorites MER basalts (Adirondack, (SO2, H2SO4) (Mg,Ca,Fe) SO4   xH2O Bounce Rock) In the volcanic scenario, the observed chemical composition is accounted for by essentially isochemical alteration of basaltic ash in situ by reaction with sulfuric acid followed by oxidation with atmospheric O2 [3]. Small variations in chemical composition with depth at Endurance Crater can be accounted for by minor variations in initial composition of the ash Fig. 1.  Ternary diagram showing molar proportions of the   major elements in Meridiani bedrocks and in martian basalts.  All of the bedrocks measured to date are compositionally similar to marrtian basalt exception for high abundances of S and O.  The simplest way to account for their composition is by addition of a pure S endmember component (e.g., SO2, H2SO4) to martian basalt, as in the volcanic model [3].   and/or small scale mobility of highly soluble Mgsulfate salts during alteration.  Most elements, however, reflect the underlying basalt composition with little modification.  The overall outcome is bedrocks that have a martian basaltic composition with S and O added. In the sedimentary/evaporite scenario, the current chemical composition of the rocks derives from a combination of the initial siliciclastic component and sulfate salts precipitated from evaporation of groundwater.  In this scenario, a large fraction of the divalent cations (Mg, Fe, Ca) presently found in the rock are inferred to be transported into the rocks along with sulfate in groundwater and precipitated as sulfate salts [2,8].  If this is the case, the chemical composition of the initial siliciclastic component could not have been basalt, or the rocks would be enriched in divalent cations relative to martian basalt, which is not observed [3].  Instead, constraints imposed by the bulk chemistry of the rocks would require that the primary siliciclastic component must be significantly depleted in Σ(Mg+Fe+Ca) and enriched in Si and Al relative to pristine martian basalt, with a Σ(Mg+Fe+Ca)/ Σ(Si+Al) ≈ 0.7 (Fig. 2).  It has been suggested that the siliciclastic component in the sedimentary/evaporite scenario may represent basalt that was chemically altered by interaction with sulfuric acid [1].  Although the exact mineralogical composition of the inferred primary siliciclastic input cannot be precisely determined, if it is derived from altered basalt, this component would likely be composed predominantly of phyllosilicates (Fig. 2).   In any case, it should be emphasized that, although the MER team has consistently referred to the siliciclastic component as "basaltic" [e.g., 1,2,9], constraints imposed by the bulk composition requires that the primary siliciclastic input into the Meridiani bedrocks does not closely resemble basalt either chemically or mineralogically (Fig. 2). The required composition of the primary siliciclastic component in the sedimentary/evaporite scenario would appear to present some difficulties for that model.  While it would be easy to envision a source for abundant basaltic sediments, it appears to be much more difficult to identify potential sources for the large amounts of chemically altered materials that would be needed to form the Meridiani unit, since rocks of the required composition are rare elsewhere on the planet.  Although the OMEGA instrument has recently reported observations of phyllosilicates in a few isolated locations on Mars [10], these are relatively small occurrences and the phyllosilicates appear to compose only a minor fraction of the deposits.  Collectively, all of the locations identified so far would not be nearly large enough to supply the amount of material needed for Meridiani.  Furthermore, the observed locations of phyllosilicates appear to be products of alteration in situ, and large-scale sedimentary deposits of phyllosilicates are not observed elsewhere on the planet.   Jarosite AluniteSi + Al S Mg + Ca + Fe Hematite Meridiani bedrock Mars Meteorites MER basalts (SO2, H2SO4) (Mg,Ca,Fe) SO4   xH2O Salt-free endmember Chlorite Saponite Nontronite Montmorillinite Figure 2.  Extrapolation of Meridiani bedrock compositions to a salt-free endmember indicates the primary siliciclastic input into the rock must be sustantially depleted in divalent cations (Mg, Fe and Ca) and enriched in Si & Al relative to pristine martian basalt.  If this component is derived from chemical alteration of basalt, it is likely to be composed of a mixture of phyllosilicates such as saponite, nontronite, and montmorillonite. Additionally, the bulk composition of the bedrocks would require that the amounts and relative proportions of cations that were removed from the primary siliciclastic component prior to its incorporation into the rocks must be exactly balanced by those added back in by evaporating solutions, so that the final rock has the composition of martian basalts.  Although not impossible, it seems like a somewhat unlikely coincidence that this would occur and that the balance would be achieved so uniformly in all rocks at Meridiani. Conclusion:  Plausible chemical models can be constructed to account for the bulk composition of the Meridiani bedrocks for either a volcanic or sedimentary/evaporite scenario.   The volcanic model, however, is simpler and more straightforward, and invokes only processes known to occur widely elsewhere on the planets, and therefore appears to be the more likely explanation for the chemical composition of Meridiani bedrocks. References: [1] Squyres S. W. and Knoll A. H. (2005) EPSL 240, 1-10.  [2] McLennan S. M. et al. (2005) EPSL 240, 95-121. [3] McCollom T. M. and Hynek B. M. (2005) Nature 438, 1129-1131. [4] Grotzinger J. P. et al. (2005) EPSL 240, 95-121. [5] Knauth L. P. et al. (2005) Nature 438, 1123-1128. [6] Clark B. C. et al. (2005) EPSL 240, 73-94. [7] Rieder R. et al. (2004) Science 306, 17461749.  [8] Tosca N. et al. (2005) EPSL 240, 122-148.  [9] Squyres S. W. et al. (2004) Science 306, 1709-1714.  [10] Poulet et al. (2005) Nature 438, 623-627.   
