 OUTCROP-SCALE PROPERTIES OF BURNS FORMATION AT MERIDIANI PLANUM, MARS. Amanda L. Nahm1, Richard A. Schultz1, and Shane D. Thompson2, 1Geomechanics-Rock Fracture Group, Department of Geological Sciences and Engineering/172, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557-0138, nahma@mines.unr.edu; 2Department of Geological Sciences and Engineering/172, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557-0138 Summary: We performed a rock mass rating (RMR) analysis on an outcrop exposure of Burns Formation located in Meridiani Planum, Mars.  RMR values were calculated for the present dry conditions (63) and the past wet conditions (55).  Physical parameters, including strength and deformability, increased from previous water-saturated values to their present-day dry values by several 10s of percent. Introduction: The objective of this study is to determine the physical properties of materials at the outcrop scale on Mars, observed by the Mars Exploration Rover, Opportunity.  Quantifying these properties at this scale on Mars is rarely, if ever, done.  Detailed analysis using this RMR technique is important to engineers and scientists developing future missions to Mars.  Although this technique has been used extensively on Earth, a rock mass rating (RMR) analysis has not been applied to an outcrop on Mars until now.  Opportunity, with its highresolution images over a wide area, presents a unique opportunity to apply this technique to Martian materials.  An RMR analysis was performed on a selected outcrop of Burns Formation at Meridiani Planum, Mars. This outcrop was imaged by the navigation camera (NAVcam) on approximately sol 399 (1 sol = 1 Martian day).  Bieniawski developed the rock mass rating system in 1973 [1].  RMR is commonly used by geological engineers to assess the strength and deformability (modulus) of a rock mass, which includes intact rock material, fractures, and pore fluid, for applications such as tunnels, slopes, foundations, and mines [1]. In this study, this method has been applied to Mars to determine the physical properties of the outcrop.  This approach allows standardization of rock mass strength analysis so that one outcrop can be compared to another, regardless of age, location, or composition. Outcrop description: The outcrop exposure studied was imaged on March 8, 2005 (sol 399) and is located on the rim of Vostok crater at Meridiani Planum, Mars (Figure 1).  In the outcrop located roughly 1.6 km from the original landing site, there are ~100 joints, ranging in length from a few millimeters to ~1 meter.  There is a general trend of larger joints being oriented in roughly a N-S direction.   As in other areas south of the landing site, the outcrop is covered with a veneer of eolian ripples [2].  This abundance of unconsolidated regolith generally obscures the outcrop in the region, has partially filled in the joints, as well as the crater itself.    Methods: Six factors are assessed when performing an RMR analysis.  These are: linear fracture density (or equivalent rock quality designation [eRQD]), intact rock strength (unconfined compressive strength [UCS]), average fracture spacing, fracture condition, groundwater conditions, and fracture orientation.  The first five factors are evaluated as a group and their values are summed to give an unadjusted RMR value.  The sixth parameter is included separately as an adjustment to the RMR value (either adding or subtracting points based on Section B Table 4.1 of [1]) because the influence of the orientation of the discontinuities has differing effects for various engineering applications [1].  In this study the joints show no strongly preferred direction, so the orientation of the discontinuities is not included. The rock at this location was classified in this study as fine-grained, low-porosity sedimentary rock.  In this 1m Figure 1. Location map showing approximate location of the outcrop along Opportunity's traverse (red line).  The outcrop is enlarged in the inset frame with joints mapped in red and the eRQD traverses for the RMR analysis shown as black lines.  White scale bar is for the base image and black scale bar applies to the inset outcrop map. Base image courtesy of the Ohio State University mapping and GIS Laboratory and inset image courtesy of NASA/JPL.  study, the grain size of the intact rock material was determined to be below the resolution of the Microscopic Imager (MI) (30 μm/px), as individual grains were not discernible in the image.  However, according to [2], the primary grain size of particles in the best examples from MI images is between 0.3 and 0.8 mm, which is defined as medium-grained sand.  The finer-grained nature expressed at this site compared to others is likely a result of  differing degrees of recrystallization. Without access to Martian rock samples for testing, the unconfined compressive strength must be determined indirectly. Using the rock classification (shale) and the porosity measurements from post-RAT brushed MI images, the UCS of the outcrop was estimated using the empirical relationships between  porosity and UCS of terrestrial shale from [4].   Groundwater conditions affect the strength of the rock mass.  Water decreases the pore pressure of rock, along with weathering it  as it moves through, making the rock mass more susceptible to deformation.  The outcrop is observed to be dry at present, but several  studies [2-4]  indicate that the bedrock was formed and/or altered in a wetter environment.  RMR values were calculated for both environments and the resulting  values are shown in Table 1.  Accounting for water in the calculations reduces all values dependent on RMR.       Parameter Description Value Φ porosity 4.5% grain sizeA >31 μm UCSB unconfined compressive strength 58 +/- 15 MPa RMR rock mass rating 63 (dry) 55 (wet) m Hoek-Brown parameter [5] for outcrop 0.427 (dry) 0.241 (wet) mi C Hoek-Brown parameter [5] for intact rock material 6 +/- 2 s Hoek-Brown parameter [5] 0.002 (dry) 0.0006 (wet) E* in-situ deformation modulus of rock mass 21 GPa (dry) 13 GPa (wet) C0* cohesive strength of rock mass 1.009 MPa (dry) 0.645 MPa (wet) T0* tensile strength of rock mass -0.282 MPa (dry) -0.132 MPa (wet)    Porosity in this outcrop is low (Table 1), suggesting that joints are needed for significant fluid flow.  In the MI images, hematite concretions appear to be concentrated in the joints, but it may be an effect of erosion and not evidence that the concretions form within the joints.  The MI images at this outcrop do not reveal the relationship between the joints and the in-situ concretions.   Discussion: Applications of this method to other outcrops in the Burns Formation would allow for determination of the degree of spatial variation of physical properties, such as porosity, unconfined compressive strength, and degree of jointing, of a geologic unit on Mars.  In addition, application to outcrops imaged by Opportunity's sister rover, Spirit, at Gusev crater, would allow for analysis of more typical rock types for Mars,  and a global generalization of rock properties of Martian basalt.     Understanding the physical properties of Martian materials on the outcrop scale would allow for a greater understanding of the range of types and distribution of materials present on Mars' surface.  It may also facilitate understanding of the changes in geological processes, both on Mars' surface and in the Martian interior, through time. References: [1] Bieniawski Z. T. (1989) Engineering Rock Mass Classifications, Wiley, Chichester. [2] Grotzinger J. P. et al. (2005) EPSL, 240, 11-72. [3] Christensen P. R. et al. (2004) Mineralogy at Meridiani Planum from the Mini-TES experiment on the Opportunity Rover, Science, 306, 17331739. [4]  Squyres S. W. et al. (2004) In situ evidence for an ancient aqueous environment at Meridiani Planum, Mars, Science, 306, 1709-1714. [5] Hoek E. and Brown E. T. (1997) Int J Rock Mech & Min Sci, 34, 1165-1186. [6] Chang C. Zoback M. D. and Khaksar A. (2006) J Petrol Sci & Eng, 51, 223-237. [7] Marinos P. and Hoek E. (2001) Bull Eng Geol Env, 60, 85-92. Abstract published in Lunar and Planetary Science XXXVIII, CD-ROM (www.lpi.usra.edu/meetings), Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston (2007). Table 1. Calculated values for important parameters of the outcrop. AFrom this study; BCalculated using eq. 20 from [6]; CValue for shale from [7]. 
