 GEOLOGIC CONTEXT OF HIGH-SILICA DEPOSITS ON MARS FROM IN SITU FIELD MAPPING, COLUMBIA HILLS, GUSE V CRATER, MARS . L. S. Crumpler 1, and the Athena Sc ience Team. 1New Mexico Museum of Natural His tory and Science, Albuquerque, NM 87104 ( larry.crumpler@state.nm.us) Introduction: Silica-enriched soils encountered by Spirit within the Columbia Hills near Home Plate [1,3,4] represent a record of poten tially habitable environments on Mars at the time of their formation regardless of whether they formed as re sidua from leaching of silica rocks or a deposits from silica-enriched fluids [2]. During the third Martian year "field sea son", the geologic setting of the these deposits was exa mined in detail by the MER Spirit rover during a series of traverses up and down the "East Valley" between Home Plate and Mitcheltree Ridge. Correlative mapping of outcrop layers examined by the Athena in struments around the margins of the East Valley enabled the construction a true field -based geologic map. The resulting contacts are constrained in three dimen sions and support both stratigraphic and structural interpretations. Mitcheltree Ridge and Low Ridge oc cupy structural synclines that merge to the west and northwest (respectively) with the margins of Home Plate along a monoclinal to ant iclinal axis. The floor of the East Valley where the silica -enriched materials occur is a stru ctural hinge line along which the lowest stratigraphic materials yet vis ited by Spirit are ex posed. Confinement to the lowest stratigraphic layers indicates that the silica-enriched deposits are among the oldest materials examined. Alternately, the apparent stratigraphic position is spurious and the deposits are laterally discontinuous and unconformable (local hydrothermal or recently formed under current relief conditions). Mapping Analysis Methods: The thorough and deli berate series of outcrop examinations by Spirit enabled the use of standard field geologic procedures and ultimately the con struction of a well -constrained geologic map. The position of boundaries between dis tinctive layers and marker units were mapped along the entire traverse of East Valley using Navcam stereo ranging from multiple positions . The results were plo tted in planimetric pe rspective and co -registered within the corresponding HiRISE image ( PSP_001513_1655) [5]. Following standard field mapping methods, field determined contacts segments were then combined with the continu ation of the con tacts as detected in the high resolution, over head image data, Based on in situ results at several outcrops (1, WinterHaven2; 2, Troll; 3, Bellin gshausen; 4, Madeline English; 5, Clara Zap; 6, Torquas; 7, Nancy Warren; 8, Pes apallo) (Fig. 1), including Microscopic Imager results at the actual out crops, inter pretations of lithol ogy and corresponding correl ations from location to location were established, resulting in an in situ, observationbased geologic map. Observation Summary: Spirit traversed the valley ("East Val ley") and examined outcrops b etween Home Plate, Mitcheltree Ridge, and Low Ridge b etween sols 772 and 1304. Distinctive light -toned, lumpy soils, some silica en riched, were ident ified in the central axis of the valley; more platey materials similar to the loose plate "Halley" may be stratigraphically lower. RAT brushing of one outcrop of the immediately overlying material (Montalva) was also ex ceptionally light toned and anomalously potassic. The lumpy, light-toned, silica-enriched soils appear stratigraphically conformable in that within the East Valley they always occur at least below a prominent layer several centim eters thick that rims the valley on the lower flanks of Low Ridge and Mitcheltree Ridge, and the east margin of Home Plate. But their location on the valley floor could be because they collected in the lo cal topographic trough of the valley. The west dip on the east margin of Home Plate, eastward dip along the base of Mitcheltree Ridge imply a anticlinal structure for the valley floor in agreement with the ap parent strat igraphically lower position and narrow distribution of the valley floor deposits. The bedding on the margins of Mitcheltree Ridge and Low Ridge southward are likewise evidence for synclinal structures underl ying these ridges and im ply significant inversion of topography. MI data for outcrops on the south (Graham Land, Troll), east (Tor quas) and west (Madeline English) sides of the valley are all characterized by equant spherical grains interpreted to be an unusually fluid type of lapilli (pyroclastic "droplets"). Discussion. At least three alternative models for the geologic setting of the silica-enriched deposits can be considered based on field -based geo logic mapping: (1) the deposits are a distinct layer or paleo surface recording a period of silica deposition or leaching prior to deposit of the overlying units, in cluding Home Plate lithologies, (2) the deposits formed as precipitates or residua along vertical discontinuities occupied by hydrothermal fluids associated with local volcanism along Mitcheltree Ridge, or (3) the deposits are relatively recent and developed in soils filling local depressions in the current topography. In addition to the above results, the complexity of the local geology as captured in the mapping over an area a few tens of meters across, is evidence that the surface of Mars (1) retains detailed contact and unit boundary rela tionships, espe cially where deflation has uncovered the substrate, (2) is geologically complex at human and rover scales, implying that numerous unique geologic events are likely to be captured in isolated outcrops across the planet, and (3) records at  even modest scales signif icant stratigraphic unconformities and variations in environment through geologic time. References: [1] Squyres et al, Science 316, 738-742, 2007. [2] Squyres et al, EOS Transa ctions AGU, 88(52), P21C-01, 2008. [3] Ruff et al, EOS Transactions AGU, 88(52), P23A-1097, 2008; [4] Yen et al., EOS Transactions AGU, 88(52), P23A-1095, 2008; [5] McEwen et al, JGR 2006. __________________________ Figure 1. Field based geologic sketch map of "East Valley" b etween Home Plate and Mitcheltree ridge. Note that silica enriched deposits ("n") occur principally along an anticlinal structural axis. The silica en-riched materials are either a deep layer exposed along shallow structure contours of the antiform, or loose materials trapped in the valley floor subsequent to development of the current relief. Red circles indicate locations of in situ observation stations discussed in "Observation Summary". Location of cross section (Fig.2) indicated by line end-labeled iiii'. Map width, 80 m. ________________________ Figure 2. East valley crosses section based on in situ observations of outcrops. Silica e nriched materials tend to occur along the anticlinal axis defi ning the valley centerline or where low -lying units are more deeply dissected. 	Page #1	Page #2
