 GEOMORPHOLOGY OF THE COLUMBIA HILLS COMPLEX: LANDSLIDES, VOLCANIC VENT, AND OTHER HOME PLATES.  J. W. Rice Jr.1, R. Greeley1, R. Li2, W. Wang2, L. Crumpler3, W. H. Farrand4, and the Athena Science Team, 1Arizona State University, School of Earth and Space Exploration, Tempe, AZ 85287, jrice@asu.edu, 2Ohio State University, Columbus Ohio, 3New Mexico Museum of Natural History & Science, Albuquerque, NM, 4Space Science Institute, Boulder, CO.   Introduction: The Mars Exploration Rover Spirit has been exploring the diverse and complex geology of the Columbia Hills region of Gusev Crater for over five and a half years. New observations from both the surface and orbit have revealed landslides, a possible volcanic vent, and additional Home Plate-like materials scattered around the Inner and East Basins of the Columbia Hills. This presentation will report on  the geomorphology of these new features as well as their implications for the geologic evolution of this region of Mars. Data sets used for this study are Spirit Pancam and Navcam imagery; HiRISE imagery and HiRISE DTM. The Columbia Hills are most likely the upper remnants of a central peak or peak ring in Gusev Crater [1,2]. As a rule impact crater central peak and peak ring heights do not exceed final crater depth, in the case of Gusev this depth was 3 km [3]. Consequently, the height of these peaks would have risen up to 3 km above the floor based on depthdiameter relations for complex craters [4]. However, Gusev has crater fill material that is between 2.5 to 3 km thick [5]. So the remaining peaks would be akin to nunataks barely poking up through this interior fill. The present day Columbia Hills rise ~130 m above the basaltic plains located on the floor of Gusev Crater. Therefore, it is important to bear in mind that we are just viewing the tops of once lofty peaks. Landslides: Mass wasting in the form of landslides is an important geomorphic process that has shaped the Columbia Hills and up until now has not been recognized. Several landslides are identified on Clark, Husband, and McCool Hills. Additionally, a large ancient landslide may have been responsible for carving out the Inner Basin along the edges of Haskin and Allegheny Ridges and McCool Hill. This scar is visible as a rectilinear gouge. The morphologically freshest appearing mass wasting feature is called the Arthur C. Clarke landslide. It is located on the southern flank of Husband Hill and is the most obvious and  youngest such feature in the Columbia Hills (Figs. 1 and 2). In fact this slide flowed over the western margins of the Eldorado dune field. The slope at the headscarp is 19° and the slope along the slide path is 11.4°, the vertical drop is 66 m and runout distance is 335 m. This yields a H/L ratio of 0.19 which is a common value for volcanic debris avalanches [6]. Goddard Crater: This feature forms an elliptical depression 35 m x 25 m, ranging in depth from 2.6 to 3.5 m, has a light toned outcrop inside along its eastern rim and blocky western interior (Fig. 3). This crater also has a rim collar ranging from 2.5 m to 5 m wide. This feature is emplaced along the flank of a small ridge. Goddard Crater appears to be a volcanic vent and not an impact crater based on its morphology, geometry, context, and associated eroded materials interpreted to be pyroclastics. A small valley pass 7 m wide separates Goddard from von Braun Butte. von Braun Butte: This feature is 27 m long and rises ~8 m above the surrounding plains. From the surface von Braun is a layered butte with cliff and ledge forming members, has scattered dark boulders and appears to be capped with Home Plate-like material (Fig. 3). von Braun is interpreted to be an erosional remnant of a once more extensive unit that covered the Inner Basin. Interestingly, the Oberth, Korolev and Faget outcrops, located along the lower flanks of McCool Hill, appear morphologically similar to von Braun Butte and are located near the same elevations. These observations indicate that the Inner Basin may have once been filled to a depth of  ~20 m with the material that makes up these outcrops. Continuing  counterclockwise around the Inner Basin from McCool Hill and onward to Haskin Ridge there is a contact of light toned, polygonally fractured rock that further substantiates evidence of a formerly extensive unit that has been primarily eroded away.  Other Home Plates: Home Plate is a deposit formed by hydrovolcanic eruptions [7] which indicates that rising magma interacted with either a groundwater and or subsurface ice table. Five other Home Plate-like features have been identified in the Inner Basin and three more in the East Basin (Fig. 2). Crossfield is located between Home Plate and Goddard in the Inner Basin and is interpreted to be a Home Plate that has not had its aeolian mantle removed. An elliptical shaped Home Plate-like feature in the East Basin is about the same size as Home Plate, 90 m diameter. These various features and locations indicate that hydrovolcanism was not an isolated episode in the Columbia Hills.  Conclusions: Spirit's field geology investigations in the Columbia Hills have revealed a very rich and diverse landscape. It is strongly hoped that Spirit will be able to free itself from its current mired state and resume it's drive southward to the realms of von Braun, Goddard, and Crossfield.    References: [1] Rice J.W. Jr. (2005) Eos Trans. AGU, 86(52), Abstract P21A-0133. [2] McCoy T.J. et al. (2008) JGR, 113, E06S03. [3] Dence M.R. and Grieve R.A.F. (1979) LPSC X, 292-294. [4] Garvin J. B. et al. (2000) Icarus, 144, 329-352. [5] Howenstine J.B. and Kiefer W.S. (2005) LPSC XXXVI, abstract 1742. [6] Hayashi J.N. and Self S. (1992) JGR, 97, No. B6, 9063-9071. [7] Squyres S.W. et al., (2007) Science, 316, 738-742.     Figure 1. View looking north of Clarke landslide located on southern flanks of Husband Hill.   Figure 2. Regional view of features in the Inner Basin in the Columbia Hills.       Figure 3. von Braun Butte and Goddard Crater. 
