 INDICATIONS OF WATER-LIMITED ALTERATION FROM MARTAIN SOIL MINERALOGY.  I. O. McGlynn1, H. Y. McSween1, C. M. Fedo1, and A. D. Rogers2, 1Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences and Planetary Geosciences Institute, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996-1410 (imcglynn@utk.edu), 2Department of Geosciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY NY 11792-2100.  Introduction:  Unconsolidated sediments or soils cover most the surface of Mars and provide the only direct clues on the formation and alteration of landscapes. Global and localized environmental changes over time can be identified from compositional variations in generated sediments. The chemistry and mineralogy of sediments can reflect unweathered bedrock or altered equivalents.  The details of surface composition and regolith evolution provide critical information to understand the current elemental and mineralogical concentrations, their regional differences, and the timing and mechanisms of alteration.  Identifying the major mineral components in soils provides a bridge to understanding the crustal composition of Mars and how the planet's geology may have changed. Soils are particularly sensitive measures of alteration, because of their fine grain sizes and high reaction surface areas. The mineralogical composition of basaltic rocks and the resulting basaltic soils can govern the method and extend of weathering and alteration. Physical weathering from impacts and abrasion and chemical weathering from hydrolysis, palagonization [1], acid fog [2,3], and hydrothermal alteration [4] each interact with basalt rocks in a specific pathway. This study attempts to characterize the chemical weathering of basaltic soils through the evaluation of mineralogical changes in soil at the Mars Exploration Rover (MER) landing sites in Gusev Crater and Meridiani Planum. Data Sets:  Soil mineralogy estimates are calculated from Alpha Particle X-Ray Spectrometer (APXS) bulk chemistry and iron-bearing minerals from the Mössbauer Spectrometer (MB). This method, originally devised for igneous rocks [5,6], is modified to include alteration minerals, specifically phyllosilicates and silica detected by Mini-TES and sulfates and chlorides estimated from APXS chemistry (Fig. 1). Smectite is modeled as a 1:1 ratio of montmorillonite and nontronite matching the 5% phyllosilicate abundance estimated for Meridiani Planum soils [7]. All sulfur is removed in an equal ratio of MgSO4 and CaSO4 and chloride is removed as NaCl and KCl. To evaluate weathering pathways, soil mineralogy compositions are correlated with existing textural parameters from measured grain size distributions and soil types [8,9]. Interpretation of Olivine Loss:  Olivine, basaltic glass, and feldspars are highly susceptible to chemical alteration from the interaction of water as stable liquid, frost, or as condensation from fog. Chemical weathering of olivine and feldspars and corresponding production of phyllosilicates can be evaluated by relative ratios of insoluble (Al2O3) to soluble components (CaO, NaO, K2O, FeOT, MgO) in A-CNK-FM plots. However soils at both MER landing sites have the chemical composition of unaltered basalts [2], limiting the possibility of hydrolysis. Lower concentrations of FeOT+MgO are present in soils relative to most RATed rocks. If the soils are locally derived, the rocks should provide a reasonable compositional protolith from which to model soil formation. The loss of olivine may have resulted from dissolution caused by acid-sulfate weathering where precipitated acid fog from volcanic outgasing of chlorine and sulfur breaks down exposed basalt surfaces [2].    Figure 1. Methodology of mineralogy calculations [6] from APXS and MB data, modified to incorporate 5% phyllosilicates as smectite, 10% silica, and appropriate amounts of sulfate and chloride.   When grouped by texturally defined soil type [9], high-albedo bright dust soils have the lowest olivine concentrations (Fig. 2). These soils are composed of the most physically weathered grains at both landing sites, and are too small (<32µm) to be measured from the Microscopic Imager (MI). Bright dust soils represent the weathering limit, as sediments are continuously grounded into finer grains from aeolian driven abrasion and impact gardening. A progression in olivine concentrations are observed in grain sizes and dust mixing, with higher olivine concentrations in sand-sized dark soil samples and the highest olivine concentrations in bedform armour soils. Although the lithic fragment class of soils are comprised of the largest and least physically weathered pebbles, they also contain  a higher fraction of dust cover than bedform armour soils. Despite the variations in olivine concentrations among soil classes, soils are largely homogeneous relative to heterogeneous rock estimates, limiting the extent of olivine loss from weathering.   Figure 2. Mean olivine concentrations for six soil types in Gusev Crater corresponding with dust mixing with lowest olivine in BD soils and highest in BA. Soils are homogeneous relative to rock compositions. Soil types: BD bright dust, DS dark soil, BA bedform armour, LF lithic fragments, DHB dark soil with high bedform mixing, DLB dark soil with low bedform armour mixing. Rock types: Ad Adirondack, Ir Irvine, Ws Wishstone, Bs Backstay, Al Algonquin, Bh Barnhill.  Global Soil Homogeneity:  The two MER landing sites are in distinct geologic settings with different landscapes, have  different alteration histories, and are separated by thousands of kilometers, yet have similar mean soil mineralogies (Table 1). Alteration minerals comprise 1/3 of the soils at both Gusev Crater and Meridiani Planum. The similarity in soil means is either a result of large-scale global mixing of aeolian transported sediments from heterogeneous basaltic sources forming a globally averaged surface, or from locally mixed soils that have been formed from similar basaltic protoliths. Dust deposits can homogenize detected soil compositions, but should be insufficient to mask soils derived from compositionally unique basalts found at both landing sites. Furthermore, the absence of significant quantities of detectable phyllosilicates limits the possibility of a homogenizing alteration mechanism. Conclusions:  Soils at the MER landing sites are largely (2/3) unaltered basaltic sediments with no significant evidence of hydrolysis. Olivine loss from normative mineralogy estimates indicate small to moderate degrees of chemical weathering, possibly from acid fog, corresponding with grain size and fractional dust cover in soil classes. Mean soil mineralogies are the same despite distinct local rocks at the two MER landing sites.  Table 1. Mineral estimates for averaged soils in Gusev Crater and Meridiani Planum compared to Mini-TES estimates for Meridiani Planum.  Gusev Crater Meridiani Planum MiniTES [7] Primary (igneous) minerals  Olivine 12.8 13.5 18 -0+1  Pyroxenes 17.2 20.5 31 -3+3  Feldspars  (Plagioclase) 32.3 29.1 18-12+6  Magnetite+Chromite 2.3 2.1   Apatite 3.1 1.9  Secondary (alteration) minerals  npOxide 3.5 3.6 0 -0+0  Hematite 0.7 1.4 0 -0+0  Sulfates 10.5 11.0 8 -3+6  Chlorides 2.6 2.0   Silica 10.0 10.0 10 -0+2  Clays 5.0 5.0 5 -3+1  Other   9 -3+2 Total alteration 32.2 33.0 32  References:  [1] Bell J. F. et al. (2000) JGR, 105, 1721-1755. [2] Hurowitz J. A. and McLennan S. M. (2007) EPSL, 260, 432-443. [3] Morris R. V. et al. (2008) JGR, 113, E12S42. [4] Schmidt M. E. et al. (2008) JGR,  113, E06S12. [5] McSween H. Y. et al. (2008) JGR, 113, E06S04. [6] McGlynn I. O. et al. (2009) LPS XL, Abstract #2249. [7] Rogers A. D. and Aharonson O. (2008) JGR, 113, E06S14. [8] McGlynn I. O. et al. (2008) LPS XXXVIIII, Abstract #1332. [9] McGlynn I. O. et al (2010) LPS XLI, this volume. 
