 ROVER MOBILITY AT THE "TROY" SITE, MARS: A MODELING PERSPECTIVE.  K. A. Lichtenberg 1, R. E. Arvidson 1, R. Lindemann 2, K. Iagnemma 3, K. J. Bennett 1, B. Trease 2, L. Richter 4, and M. Scharringhausen 4, 1 Dept. of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis MO 63130 (lichtenberg@wunder.wustl.edu), 2 Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA 91109, 3 Department of Mechanical Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139,  4 German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Space Systems, Bremen 28359, Germany.  Introduction:  For the last six months, the Mars Exploration Rover (MER) Spirit has been rendered immobile by a sulfate-rich sandy material located on the west of Home Plate at a site called "Troy".  While traveling south toward Goddard and Von Braun for the winter, Spirit skirted the edge of a bowl-shaped depression ("Scamander Plains") and broke through a thin surface crust revealing a high-albedo sandy material.  After a few sols of maneuvering, four of Spirit's six wheels were partially-to-nearly completely buried (Fig. 1) and percent slip during both turning and driving was on the order of 95-98%.  Additionally, MI images taken of the underbelly of the rover showed that the warm electronics box (WEB) may be high-centered on a rock.  Realizing the severity of Spirit's situation, the team temporarily halted driving on sol 1899 to conduct ground-based testing and devise an extrication plan.  Figure 1: Spirit's left-front wheel and part of the area that became the Ulysses IDD work volume over the next 200 sols.  This front Hazcam was taken on sol 1899 and shows the extent to which the left-front wheel was caked and buried in the Troy sands.  Ground-based testing occurred over four months, using both the Surface System Test Bed (SSTB) and SSTB-lite rovers in JPL's In-Situ Instrument Laboratory (ISIL).  The SSTB rover has science instrumentation and engineering cameras whereas the SSTB-lite rover is stripped down to approximate the rover's weight in Mars gravity.  To replicate the conditions on Mars as faithfully as possible, an 8'x12' sandbox was built and filled with a soil simulant in which to embed the test rovers.  The sandbox was tilted approximately 12 degrees to replicate Spirit's roll in Troy.  Two simulants were eventually used to bound the worst-case and bestcase behaviors of a 5-wheeled vehicle in the Troy material: a mixture of diatomaceous earth (DE) and fireclay for the former and a garnet aggregate for the latter.  In addition, single MER wheel tests were done at DLR in the DE/fireclay mixture to quantitatively establish drawbar pull vs. wheel slip for the embedded wheels. Concurrent with the later part of the ISIL testing was the start of a modeling effort to better understand the results of the tests on a first-principles basis and to aid extrication efforts on a tactical timeline, adding insight into commanded drives and resultant motions.  On a longer-scale timeline, it is anticipated that this model in its final form will be used in a predictive manner to assess terrain navigability for current and future rovers. Methods:  MSC Adams is a commercially available software package that can be used to model mechanical systems and their interactions with a physical environment.  The main interface is Adams/View, but subdivisions exist within the Adams program that are tailored to specific industry needs; for example, Adams/Car is used heavily in the automotive industry.  A mechanical model of the Mars Exploration Rovers was created in Adams/View prior to launch [1,2] so analyses were conducted using both the Adams/View and Adams/PostProcessor interfaces.   Adams can currently model contact forces using Coulomb frictional contacts and Stribeck stiction and friction transition velocities, with vertical deformation assumed to be due to simple damped spring systems.  Each contact between the mechanical system (i.e. rover) and its environment (i.e. the terrain) is given its own set of  parameters that are used to govern the contact forces, including for spatially varying soil types. Analysis:  We are currently in the process of correlating model results with ISIL test data and replicating the drive into Troy on sol 1871, but preliminary simulations have successfully replicated a number of behaviors seen in the ISIL and with Spirit on Mars.  These include yaw about the inoperable right-front wheel, translational movement in the downslope direction, excessive (~90%) slip in the drive direction, and a tendency to "pop a wheelie" with the right middle wheel.  Low actuator currents associated with recent extrication events for Spirit suggest a similar process has occurred on the right-middle wheel, but without a full wheelie. A digital elevation model (DEM) of the terrain directly beneath and around Spirit's current position was derived from pre-drive Navcam images and successfully imported into the model.  To increase the fidelity of the model in its current state, wheel tracks (ruts) were manually created by visual inspection of Navcam and Hazcam images and are visible in the simulation frames in Figure 2. The wheel ruts are modeled using different Coulomb and Stribeck parameters than the surrounding terrain to simulate the lack of crust in those areas.  In addition, a first-order approximation of deformable soils within the ruts is achieved by changing the permitted penetration depth and elastic spring constant of the material and allowing the normal force feedback loop between the ground and the wheels to do the rest. Discussion:  Although they are a good first-order approximation, the simple contacts that are currently modeled in Adams/View do not address all of Spirit's mobility issues.  The ability to model multiple and/or continuous contacts between the wheels and the terrain and to model the terrain as a deformable, changing surface is necessary for accurate and reliable simulation results.  Adams/View does not currently model deformable soils, so creating and/or incorporating a deformable soils model with deformation history for use with Adams/View is currently underway using the semi-empirical "Bekker Equations" [3]. Providing another resource to aid in the Spirit extrication effort was the impetus for this endeavor, but we anticipate that the project will become part of the overall effort in path planning and navigation for both Martian and Lunar rovers. References: [1] Lindemann R. et al. (2006) IEEE, 13(2) , 19-26. [2] Lindemann R. et al. (2005) ASME conference, Paper# DETC2005-85622, 99-106. [3] Richter L. et al. (2006) 10th European Conference of the ISTVS.  Figure 2: (right) Adams simulation on Navcamgenerated DEM (salmon color) with wheel ruts (red color).  This simulation commanded approximately 2 meters and the right-front wheel was disabled.  As mentioned above, Coulomb and Stribeck parameters were different for the terrain and the ruts.  The frames are as follows:  (a) the position of the rover in the wheel ruts shortly after beginning the simulation, (b) 16 seconds into the simulation the right-middle wheel is lifted completely off the surface,  (c) 30 seconds into the simulation the rover shows rotation around the right-front wheel, and (d) at the end of the simulation (50 seconds) the extensive yaw moved 5 of the 6 wheels out of the ruts.  
