 ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL ROCK COATINGS AT ROCKNEST, GALE CRATER WITH CHEMCAM.  D. L. Blaney1, R. Anderson2 G. Berger3, J. Bridges4. N. Bridges5, B. Clark6, S. Clegg7, M.D. Dyar8 B. Ehlmann9,  W. Goetz10, P.L. King11, N. Lanza7, N. Mangold12, P-Y. Meslin3, H. Newsom13, and The MSL Science Team, 1NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory / California Institute of Technology, Diana.L.Blaney@jpl.nasa.gov)  4800 Oak Grove Drive,  MS 264-528, (818-354-5419,  2USGS, 3IRAP, 4U. Leicester  5APL, 6SSI 7LANL, 8Mt Holyoke, 9Caltech,10MPS, 11ANU, 12U. Nantes, and 13UNM.   Introduction:  Many locations on Mars have low color contrast between the rocks and soils due to the rocks being "dusty"—i.e. having a surface that is spectrally similar to Martian dust. This has been interpreted as soil and/or dust clinging to the rock though either mechanical or electrostic processes.  However, given the apparent mobility of thin films of water forming cemented soils on Mars and at Gale Crater [e.g. 1,2], the possibility exists that some of these "dusty" surfaces may actually be coatings formed by thin films of water locally mobilizing soil/air fall material at the rock interface.  This type of coating was observed by Spirit during an investigation of the rock Mazatzal which showed enhanced salts above "normal soil" [3] and an enhancement of nano phase iron oxide that was ~ 10 µm thick [4].  We decided to use ChemCam to investigate the possibility of similar rock coatings forming at the Rocknest site at Gale Crater.   ChemCam is a Laser Induced Breakdown Spectrometer (LIBS) with an integrated Remote Microscopic Imager (RMI) to provide context of where each LIBS spectra is collected.  ChemCam LIBS works by firing a laser focused to a 350 - 550 µm diameter spot that produces plasma from the rock.  Spectra of elemental emission lines are recorded from 240-850 nm and used to determine the elemental composition of the rock [5,6] for more details on ChemCam and data analysis].  Table 1:  ChemCam Observations (Sol acquired is the last two digits of the sequence number). Target Sequence Raster Size Peg ccam03071 3x3 Rocknest 6 ccam01071 3x3 Rocknest 6a ccam04087 3x3 (7 of 9 used here) Rocknest 6b ccam05087 3x3 (8 of 9 used here) Rocknest 3 Top ccam01088 5x5 (1-15 used here) Snare ccam01069 1x5 Walsh ccam03079 3x3  Data Utilized:  While at Rocknest, ChemCam collected elemental data on a variety of rocks by collecting rasters of various sizes across rock faces.  At each location a spectrum was collected for each of the 30 laser shots fired at the rock.  For instance, the Peg observation consists of 270 spectra (30 shots at 9 different locations on the rock). In general, the first LIBS spectra are excluded from the averages to avoid including dust and the remaining spectra are averaged together to get a rock composition.  However for this study, each individual LIBS spectrum was processed.  In all 62 chemical depth profiles of  30 shots were examined in detail to determine if there was evidence for rock coatings (Table 1).  Spectra with high CaO abundances are covered in depth in other papers [7] and analysis locations that hit soil rather than rock were excluded (Table 1).  A chemical composition was generated from each individual spectrum using the ChemCam team standard Partial Least Squares analysis to produce an elemental oxide abundance for SiO2 Fe2O3, CaO, MgO, Al2O3, TiO2, Na2O, K2O, and MnO.   Analysis: To search for potential coatings, at each of the 62 Rocknest LIBS locations studied, the compositional average of the last 10 laser shots was calculated.  To look for coatings, the Last 10 Shot Average (L10SA) was compared to: a) the last 10 shots; b) shots 4-10; and c) the first shot. Figure 1 shows the results for Fe2O3 and SiO2, which had the largest differences between the first and last 10 shots.  In general, the compositions of the last 10 shots tightly cluster around the L10SA although there is some dispersion that is expected as the expected variability in the rock composition or the LIBS spectra generation or in the PLS analysis. The first shots are significantly offset from the L10SA. While the Fe2O3 is relatively constant, the first shots do not cluster at a single SiO2 composition.  There is also a slight correlation with first shot silica content and average 10 shot silica content—i.e. if the L10SA silica content is higher then the first shot silica content is higher.  As would be expected, the situation for shots 4-10 is much more complex with many observations being tightly clustered around the L10SA with other offset from it.  There is no uniform clustering indicating that a coating of uniform composition is present in the observations. In general the rock targets selected were chosen to have the cleanest surfaces to maximize texture information from the RMI so there may be a selection bias in the data set  for rocks least likely to have coatings  in the data set. In addition to using the difference between the first and L10S compositions to search for coatings, the elemental profiles were inspected individually and were classified to search for isolated example of coatings. In general, most elemental depth profiles follow a similar pattern.  The composition of the first shot differs from the bulk of the rock. (e.g. the first shots clustering off the L10SA in Figure 1.)   Figure 1. Variability of Fe2O3 and SiO2 at Rocknest:  Peg (navy), Rocknest (green), Rocknest 6a (cyan), Rocknest 6b (gold), Rocknest 3Top (red), Snare (magenta), and Walsh (blue).  Individual shot analysis (+) are compared to the average composition of the last 10 shots (*).  Generally after 1-3 shots the composition approximates the L10SA.  This pattern is repeated for 43 of the 62 observations.  Looking at the SiO2 trends in the rest of the observations, 11 observations had a similar shape but the number of shots required to reach the rock bulk compositions was >3, indicating a thicker layer of material covering the rock (see Figure 2, Peg). The other 8 observations showed distinctive elemental profiles that were either flat indicating uniform composition (2 observations), increased monotonically (2 observations), or showed a rise in SiO2  content well above the L10SA before decreasing to L10SA (4 observations) (See Figure 2, Snare).  Identification of Potential Coatings:   The compositional profiles in Figure 2 are consistent with thin coatings formed by localized mobilization of water near the rock surface.  In the Peg example CaO and SiO2 are anti-correlated perhaps indicating some mobile calcium phase being concentrated on the surface.  This would not be surprising given the much higher CaO content found on other nearby rock surfaces and in the soil [7].  The Snare examples are consistent with a coating that has a higher Ca content in the uppermost layer (again showing a Ca and Si anti-correlation) followed by silica-rich layer.  Similar trends were observed at other locations besides Rocknest [8].  These preliminary results while intriguing are not definitive evidence for coatings.  The small size of the LIBS spot introduces sampling variability on a shot to shot basis as particular mineral grains can occupy a substantial fraction of the vaporized volume.  Rock texture and the ability to trap loose materials in crevices may also play a role.  Addtionally, systematic issues in the data reduction such as distance corrections, baseline removal, normalization, and library choices may also affect the results.  More analyses, including customized processing of observations, the examination of trace elements (e.g., Sr), identification of systematic biases, and examining other data sets to identify additional examples are being undertaken to refine / confirm these results. Figure 2.  Elemental depth profiles (SiO2-top, Fe2O3middle, CaO-bottom) for two locations on the rock Snare (magenta) and one location on the rock Peg (navy) that may be coatings.  References:  [1] Meslin this volume, [2] Goetz this volume, [3] Gellert et al, Science, 305, 2004, [4] Fleisher et al, Hyperfine Interactions, 193-198 2008, [5] Wiens et al. this volume, [6]Maurice et al. this volume, [7] Clegg et al this volume,  [8] Lanza et al. this volume. Acknowledgements:  This work has been conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.   
