 ANALYSIS OF ROCK BREAKDOWN FEATURES AT GUSEV CRATER, MARS.  R. D. Schwegman 1 and M. C. Bourke 2,3 , 1 Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma (ryan.schwegman@okstate.edu), 2 Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, Arizon, 3 Department of Geography, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.    Introduction: Rock breakdown features are a physical imprint of processes that have modified the morphology of individual rocks over geologic time and are useful in interpreting the geomorphic history of a landscape [1].  To date, rock breakdown features have been qualitatively described at all landing sites on Mars and a myriad of features have been identified (e. g. grooves, pitting, fretting, etc [2]).  Here we use a quantitative approach for identifying breakdown processes on rocks along the Spirit Rover traverse through the cratered plains and western Husband Hill, Gusev Crater, Mars. Study Area: Husband Hill is one of seven peaks included in the Columbia Hills within Gusev Crater and is likely related to the original impact event that formed the crater in the Noachian.  Hesperian lava flows have since infilled the crater floor, isolating the Columbia Hills.  Although erosion, impact, and aeolian processes are thought to be dominant throughout much of Gusev Crater's history, there is also debate over the history of aqueous alteration of rocks within the Columbia Hills [3].  Some suggest alteration occurred prior to the emplacement of the plains lavas in the Hesperian [3], while others have suggested it continued episodically throughout the Amazonian [4]. Several rock classes within the Columbia Hills have been identified based on major-element geochemistry measured by Spirit's APXS instrument [5].  Three classes with significant difference in rock strength properties have been selected for this study and are described below.  Adirondack Class (Fig. 1a): Rocks are vesicular picritic basalts with olivine megacrysts displaying faceted and/or grooved textures [6, 7].  These rocks dominate the cratered plains of Gusev Crater and are also found scattered throughout the Columbia Hills as loose ejecta [5].  They are sourced from lava flows that infilled the floor of Gusev and are thus considered the youngest rock type within the Crater [3, 6]. Wishstone Class (Fig. 1b): These rocks are basaltic in composition, and are similar to terrestrial tuffs [5].  Grains are poorly sorted and range in size from 1-2 mm [5].  Rock texture consists of closely spaced knobs and pits resulting from the removal of less resistant grains by wind abrasion [5, 8].   These rocks are relatively unaltered compared to the Clovis class, suggesting an origin from deeper within the Columbia Hills that may be stratigraphically older than most rocks [6].  They   have since been deposited as loose ejecta on the northwest flank of Husband Hill [6]. Clovis Class (Fig. 1c): These are poorly sorted clastic rocks of basaltic composition and are restricted to the West Spur of Husband Hill [5].  Grain sizes range from a few millimeters up to 1 cm [5].  Rocks in this class have a characteristic knobby texture originat   Figure 1: Facet mapping technique. ing from wind erosion of less resistant material [6].  They are also layered at the fine scale indicating emplacement from a high energy environment that was most likely explosive in nature (i. e. volcaniclastic or impact) [5].  The relatively weak nature for this class is comparable to that of gypsum and suggests they have been substantially altered by fluids [5]. Methodology: Thirty samples were carefully selected for each rock class from MER Pancam raw images based on their similar appearance to classified published images [5, 6].  Each sample was then analyzed closely using the facet mapping technique.  This technique involves identifying features (e. g. pits, flutes, knobs, etc) on each facet of a rock, then assigning a genetic type to each feature (e. g. aeolian, ejecta, structural, or weathering) (Fig. 1). See [9] for further details. Results and observations: Facet mapping was applied to 237 facets on 90 samples from our three rock classes.  The data show that aeolian features dominate all three rock types (Fig. 2).  In addition, the Adirondack class has a high proportion of structural features, while Wishstone and Clovis classes have more weathering features.  Of all the features observed, regardless of genetic type, pitting was most commonly seen on the Adirondack and Wishstone classes, while knobs and ridges were most abundant in the Clovis class.  We discuss the major findings from each class below. Adirondack Class: Pitting is the most common feature observed on this class of rock with structural pits (i. e. vesicles) occurring more frequently than aeolian.  This is consistent with the origin of these rocks emplaced as basaltic lavas [6].  The majority of fluted rocks in Gusev Crater occur in this class and suggests that rock strength is an important property to support, and retain, fluted structures.  An additional feature, keels, are also related to rock strength as well as aeolian abrasion, and are most frequent on the Adirondack class rocks. Wishstone Class: The majority of pits observed on Wishstone class rocks have a weathering origin likely due to granular disintegration.  We infer that differential weathering along grain contacts led to the dislodgment of loose grains, creating pits that are then subjected to further modification by aeolian processes.  The prevalence of rounded facet edges are unusual in ejecta blocks and suggests a history of weathering processes, such as granular disintegration and flaking.  The grain size and lithology of these rocks may also make it difficult to shape facet edges into the sharp keels, as seen on Adirondack class rocks. Clovis Class: In contrast to the other two classes, pit structures are rare or are not retained on Clovis rocks.  We infer this is due to the low rock strength of this class.  Pits that are observed are likely formed by granular disintegration.  The frequency of knobs and ridges may reflect the size and form of clast mineralogy inclusions while aeolian processes help expose more resistant material.  Case hardening and spalling were observed on several rocks and are supportive of aqueous alteration [5]. Discussion and conclusions: Aeolian abrasion has been ongoing throughout much of Gusev Crater's history [7], but there is also evidence that suggest aqueous events throughout the Amazonian [4].  Our results agree with earlier observations that aeolian processes are dominant.  We also note, however, that each of our three rock types have breakdown features that may be suggestive of aqueous events, supporting chemical weathering processes, in Gusev Crater since rock emplacement at the surface [4].   Our data show that the assembledge of rock breakdown features is different for each rock class.  This suggests that lithology plays an important role in the style of breakdown on Martian rocks.   The facet mapping technique provides a quantitative approach for understanding the rock breakdown processes at Gusev and can be applied to other landing sites on Mars. References: [1] Bourke M. C. and Viles H. A. (2007) A Photographic Atlas of Rock Breakdown Features in Geomorphic Environments. [2] Thomas M. et al. (2005) Australian Journal of Earth Sci., 52, 365378. [3] McCoy T. J. et al. (2008) JGR, 113, doi:10.1029/2007JE003041. [4] Fairén A. G. et al. (2009) Planetary & Space Sci., 57, 276-287. [5] Squyres S. W. et al. (2006) JGR 111, doi:10.1029/2005JE002562. [6] Crumpler L. S. et al. (2011) JGR 116, doi: 10.1029/2010JE003749. [7] Greeley R. et al. (2004) Science, 305, 810-821. [8] Herkenhoff K. E. et al. (2006) JGR, 111, doi: 10.1029/2005JE002574. [9] Heslop E. E. M et al. (2004) LPS XXXV, Abstract #1445. Acknowledgements: Supported by NASA grant #NNX08AM409 and PGGURP.  Figure 2: Graph displaying percentages of genetic types observed on each rock class. 
