 3D CHEMICAL MAPPING USING LIBS: IMPLICATIONS FOR GEOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATIONS ON MARS.  A. Catalá-Espí1, C. Lefebvre2, P. Sobrón2, R. Léveillé2, A. Koujelev2, D. F. Blake3, H. E. F. Amundsen4 and AMASE 2011 Team. 1Centro de Astrobiología (CAB-INTA), Madrid, SPAIN (catalaea@cab.inta-csic.es), 2Canadian Space Agency, Space Science and Technology, CANADA, 3NASA Ames, USA, 4EPX, Norway.   Introduction: Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) is a powerful tool to perform chemical analyses on planetary surfaces. One advantage of LIBS is the ability to perform depth profiles through rocks and mineral coatings. Multiple laser shots can progressively ablate material at a given location on a target. In this paper, we show a geochemical investigation of a natural mineral-coated basalt that demonstrates the capability of LIBS to produce 3D chemical maps of targets. Mineral coatings formed by circulating hydrothermal fluids record important information of aqueous activity and water-rock interaction.  On Mars, hydrothermal mineral deposits, including possibly carbonates, could be associated with volcanic activity or may be induced by impacts.  Our investigation may therefore prove fruitful for the ChemCam suite on MSL in order to characterize elemental compositions of similar targets and to assess habitability of environments within Gale Crater. Sample and relevance for Mars: The sample for our study was collected during the NASA ASTEPfunded AMASE 2011 Expedition and consists of a basaltic rock with variable sub-mm mineral coatings.  The sampling site lies near the top of the Sverrefjell volcano, in Svalbard, Norway.  The Sverrefjell volcanic complex erupted at ~1Ma and contains Mg-Fe-rich carbonate in sub-mm globules in basalts and ultramafic xenoliths from the volcanoes [1].  These globules are the best terrestrial analogs to the carbonate globules in the Mars meteorite ALH84001 [2] and likely to similar carbonates on Mars, such as the Comanche outcrops studied by the Mars Exploration Rover Spirit [2];  the Comanche carbonates are thought to be of hydrothermal origin [3]. Instrumental and analytical methodology: The LIBS set-up is designed in a coaxial geometry and includes a Q-switch Nd:YAG laser (LPY150, Lambda Physik) generating 8 ns pulses at 1064 nm (16mJ@ 1 Hz). The laser pulses pass through a pierced lens and are focused onto the target by a focusing lens (f=50 mm). The emission from the plasma is collected by the latter lens, collimated, focused by the pierced lens (f=75 mm) onto the optical fibre and transported to the spectrometer (Ocean Optics HR2000, 0.1nm resolution). The target sample was placed in a vacuum chamber with a fused silica window facing the focusing lens. The chamber is pumped at 0.8 mbar and then filled with 100% CO2 gas at a pressure of 6.6 mbar to simulate Mars atmosphere. Our LIBS measurements were performed at room temperature. The selected face of the sample, shown in Figure 1, presents 4 visually distinct regions of interest. A raster of 10x10 sampling points was taken for each of those regions in order to cover enough surface for studying spatial compositional variations. 50 spectra were acquired at each sampling point, digging deeper into the sample with each one. While LIBS can perform quantitative analyses, using various statistical methods and spectral databases, our goal here was to perform rapid qualitative assessments that would be suitable for tactical operations of a planetary surface mission.    Figure 1. Rock sample showing the four selected regions for analysis by LIBS.  The blown-up images show the laser spots of a 10 x 10 raster for each selected region.   The spectra were normalized to their total intensity, which corrects for pulse to pulse variations and allows estimating the relative abundance of the elements of interest. Then, the 10x10 raster of spectra collected at each depth was averaged. In this abstract, we concentrate on a complete study of region D because it presents more chemical variables. Additional analysis of the other regions is in progress.  Results and discussion: Figure 2 shows the full width at half maximum (FWHM) values of selected emission lines associated with 12 elements relevant to the geochemistry of our sample as a function of depth.   Since the LIBS spectra were normalized to the emission total intensity, the plots in Figure 2 allow evaluating variations in the relative concentration of each of the 12 elements, thus providing a semi-quantitative multi-element chemical profile of the coating in region D. The plots  in Figure 2 have been normalized and offset for comparison purposes. For each of the indivi-  Figure 2. Element relative abundance (a.u.) as a function of the number of pulses (depth) for the average of the 10x10 points of each layer. Series normalized and offset for clarity. The leftmost column represents the three identified zones in the profiles.  dual chemical profiles, values to the right represent higher element concentration. Three zones can be identified in the profiles (Figure 2). Zone 1 shows high variability for several elements: this is consistent with the presence of surface dust of a surface alteration of the mineral coating.  Zone 2 presents a high concentration of Si and Fe near the surface that depletes as a function of depth. This could be interpreted as a Fe-Si-rich coating possibly due to Fe-oxides + silica or Si-enriched Fe-oxides. Elevated potassium in this zone may be associated with Fe-oxides. Raman spectroscopy of selected targets in region D revealed the presence of goethite and calcite, though the latter may be difficult to detect based on LIBS spectra collected in a CO2 atmosphere. Coating formation may be related to liquid immiscibility during basalt formation, but could also have occurred much later in the form of aqueous alteration and hydrothermal deposition. An increase of Ti and Li in Zone 3 and relatively less change in elemental abundances suggest that the laser made it through the mineral coating and interacted with the underlying basalt. The transition between zones is not abrupt, consistent with previous findings for LIBS analyses of rock coatings [4]. This may be due to natural variability and geometric irregularities of the different layers, but also due to the interaction of matter with nanosecond laser pulses which induces melting of sample that causes modification and mixing of different layers and therefore deteriorates depth resolution [5]. Conclusion: (1) Our LIBS results provide a rapid assessment of the composition of the surface coatings as well as detailed information of variations with depth.  Specifically, region D shows a greater concentration of Fe and Si near the surface, consistent with a coating containing goethite. Variations of other elements with depth are indicative of a chemically complex layered structure.  (2) While LIBS is a very powerful tool for chemical measurements that offers unique advantages in planetary exploration, complexities characteristic of nonlinear entangled laser-matter interactions and plasma-atmosphere interactions limit the applicability of the LIBS technique for mineralogical analysis.  Other techniques such as laser Raman spectroscopy can provide valuable molecular information that can help the interpretation of  LIBS data and enable robust and accurate geochemical and mineralogical investigations in planetary exploration. Acknowledgements: The authors acknowledge Aurelio Sanz for assistance in the Raman data collection and interpretation. CL and PS acknowledge support from NSERC. References: [1] Amundsen HEF. (1987) Nature, 327, 692-695. [2] Treiman AH, et al. (2002) EPSL, 204, 323-332. [3] Morris RV, et al. (2010) Science, 329, 421-424. [4] Lanza NL, et al. (2012) Applied Optics, 51, B74-B82. [5] Margetic V, et al.(2001) JAAS, 16, 616. 
