 CHARACTERIZING NEAR-SURFACE CHEMICAL STRATIGRAPHY ON MARS USING GAMMA RAY SPECTROSCOPY. J. T. Wilson1, P. N. Peplowski1, D. J. Lawrence1, J. O. Goldsten1, M. Burkes2, A. W. Beck1 and C. Viviano-Beck1, 1The Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel MD 20723, USA (Jack.Wilson@jhuapl.edu), 2Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore CA 94550, USA.   Introduction:  On sol 1148, while traversing the "Home Plate" region of Gusev crater near the Columbia hills, the Mars Exploration Rover (MER) Spirit made perhaps its most important discovery when it inadvertently excavated a several-cm-deep trench with its inoperative front wheel. Subsequent geochemical analyses revealed the excavated material to be opaline silica [1], which, along with other contextual evidence from the Home Plate region, led to the conclusion that this site once hosted hydrothermal activity [1].  This accidental discovery, resulting from the unintentional excavation of the trench by Spirit's inoperative wheel, is emblematic of a fundamental problem in Mars science - the existence of a near-ubiquitous layer of dust and soils across Mars' surface that obscures older, native materials of scientific interest. This dust, which was emplaced by aeolian processes and is near homogenous in chemistry, frequently obscures underlying, ancient surface materials from remote sensing measurements [2]. Although dust-free regions exist and are frequently the subject of study [3], there is a need for remote sensing observations that can peer beneath the obscuring dust to characterize the composition of the native, underlying materials.  Gamma ray spectroscopy is uniquely suited to the task of characterizing the elemental composition of materials beneath an optically thick (>100 Âµm) layer of dust and/or soil. There are two reasons for this: 1) gamma rays are produced at depths of order one meter beneath the surface, and 2) gamma rays have mean free paths of order tens of cm, with higher energy gamma rays having longer mean free paths.  Gamma ray photon energies are characteristic of the elements from which they are emitted, and many elements have multiple gamma ray lines associated with different neutron collision and capture reactions (e.g. Si's 1779 keV collision and 4934 keV capture lines).  These different photon energies have differing mean free paths (12 and 23 cm, respectively), thus they sample different portions of the regolith. The observed ratio of same-element gamma rays will therefore vary in the presense of elemental stratgragphy at the tens of cm vertical scale.    The results of prior Mars gamma ray spectroscopy investigations have been given as a bulk abundance of the top ~20 cm [4], under the assumption that no layering is present at the ~500 km sptial scale of gamma ray measurements. Here we report on an experiment designed to show that gamma ray measurements also allow cm-scale elemental stratigraphy to be measured. The results of this experiment provide the foundation for future re-analyses of Mars gamma ray datasets. Experiment:  We performed a laboratory measurement that reproduced a planetary gamma ray measurement with as a high a fidelity - as compared to a GCR-induced measurement - as was practically possible. As the basis for our measurements, we adopt as a case study  the scenario discovered by Spirit at Home Plate: a layer of nearly pure silica buried beneath a several-cm-thick layer of "typical" Mars soil.  Since primary GCRs (protons) do not reach Earth's surface, an artificial means of producing a neutron flux comparable to that produced via GCR spallation is necessary for our experiments. We generated a planetary like neutron flux using an Americium-241 + Beryllium (AmBe) source enclosed within a neutronmoderating pile of reactor-grade graphite wrapped in polyethylene, hereafter referred to as "the Pile". The Pile was specifically designed such that its output spectrum shape resembled that expected near the surface of Mars.  Our experiment used a simple, two-layer target that is shown schematically in Figure 1. Layer 1 of the target was composed of JSC-1a with a thickness that was varied over the course of the experiment. Layer 2, which was located beneath Layer 1, was composed of Figure 1. (Left) A schematic of the laboratory measurement setup. (Right) Photograph of the experiment, including the "GeMini" gamma ray spectrometer used for the measurements [5].  a ~20-cm-thick layer of sand (predominately SiO2). The two layers are located within a thin plastic tub placed on top of the Pile (Figure 1). During the experiments, the thickness of Layer 1 was varied from 0 to 12 cm. For each thickness, the target was irradiated with the AmBe+Pile neutron source for ~24 hours and the resulting gamma ray spectrum were recorded by GeMini.   JSC-1a has only 1/3 the Si atom density of sand, thus as the thickness of layer 1 is increased we would expect the ratio of 1779- to 4934-keV gamma rays is reduced due to preferential scattering of the 1779 keV particles in the upper, Si-depleted layer.  In contrast, the 4934-keV gamma rays are less subject to scattering due to their larger mean free path. This behavior is seen in the resulting Si peak ratio shown in Figure 2.  Gamma ray transport model: To extract stratigraphic information from planetary measurements we developed a model, incorporating the results of Geant4 particle transport simulations and gamma ray mean free path calculations, that describes the radiation transport associated with the experiment.  In general, the detected gamma ray flux from process ğ‘– can be expressed as the integral ğ¹# 	= 	 â„°# ğ‘“# ğ‘¥ ğ‘¡# ğ‘¥, ğ‘¦, ğ‘§ Î© ğ‘¥, ğ‘¦, ğ‘§ ğ‘‘ğ‘§	ğ‘‘ğ‘¦ /012 /034 5012 5034 ğ‘‘ğ‘¥ 6012 7 where â„°# is the detector efficiency, ğ‘“# ğ‘¥  is the emission rate for process ğ‘–,  ğ‘¡#(ğ‘¥, ğ‘¦, ğ‘§) is the fraction of emitted gamma rays that survive the distance between emission and detection and Î©(ğ‘¥, ğ‘¦, ğ‘§) is the observed solid angle of the detector.  A simple model of the experiment can be made by considering the setup as two homogeneous layers of material, with known compositions and densities, and assuming that the probability of an atom emitting a particular gamma ray is constant with depth but proportional to atom abundance.  With this model and knowledge of the detector efficiency for the gamma rays of interest one can integrate the above equation and estimate the expected gamma ray photon peak ratio. The correspondence between the model and experimental data is shown in Figure 2. We see agreement with measurements lending support to the hypothesis that gamma ray data could be used to identify stratigraphic variation on Mars. Application: The agreement between our measurements and simulations provides confidence that the simulations can be extended to Mars-like scenarios. To explore the application of this technique to Mars Odyssey GRS data [4], we extended the model to examine a semi-infinite layer beneath a thin regolith coating.  The change in Si peak ratio on addition of the regolith layer, for a range of regolith thicknesses and Si atom densities, is shown in Figure 3. For Mars Odyssey GRS data the errors on gamma ray peak fluxes are ~ 3.5%, thus the errors on the peak ratios are ~ 5%.  Therefore, the colored region in Figure 3 should be accessible to stratigraphic measurements.  Broadly, this corresponds to abundance differences greater than 40% and upper layers greater than 1 cm in depth. References: [1] Squyres, S.W. et al. (2008), Science, 320, 1063. [2] Poulet, F. et al. (2007) JGR, 112, E08S02. [3] Carter, J. et al. (2013) JGR, 118, 831-858. [4] Boynton et al., (2007), JGR 112, E12S99.. [5] Burks et al., (2008), IEEE Nuc. Sci. Sym. Rec. p1375. Figure 2. Silicon gamma ray flux ratio (1778/4934 keV peak count rates) as measured experimentally (points, with 3Ïƒ errors) and modelled (line).  Figure 3.  The change in Si flux ratio from a single layer for a range of upper layer depths and different abundances between upper and lower layers.  
