 THE CASE FOR SILICA SINTER IN THE COLUMBIA HILLS OF MARS AND WHY IT MATTERS.   S. W. Ruff1 and J. D. Farmer1, 1Arizona State University, School of Earth and Space Exploration, Tempe, AZ 85287-6305, steve.ruff@asu.edu .   Introduction:  Recently published work demonstrates remarkable similarities between outcrops of opaline silica observed by the Spirit rover adjacent to the "Home Plate" feature in the Columbia Hills of Gusev crater and hot spring deposits, known as silica sinter, at El Tatio in Chile [1]. Originally suggested to be the result of fumarolic acid-sulfate leaching [2], the Home Plate silica outcrops display morphologic, textural, and mineralogic features analogous to those of sinter deposits at El Tatio, but not recognized in fumarolic settings. Evidence for silica sinter deposits on Mars is important given the known capacity of such rocks to capture and preserve microbes, making them ideal targets in the search for ancient life on Mars [3]. Observations:  Spirit encountered discontinuous stratiform outcrops predominantly composed of opaline silica (opal-A; amorphous SiO2!nH2O) in nodular masses, some with mm-scale digitate structures. This style of occurrence is comparable to silica sinter deposits at El Tatio, where high elevation (~4300 m), low precipitation conditions at the edge of the Atacama Desert provide relatively Mars-like conditions compared to Yellowstone National Park and other wellknown hot spring settings on Earth (Fig. 1).  Figure 1. Comparison of silica rocks near Home Plate, Mars (top; sols 1232, 1234) with silica sinter at El Tatio, Chile at similar scale (bottom; note rock hammer in lower center).  The arid conditions at El Tatio and the alkalichloride waters that precipitate silica lead to thin crusts of halite (NaCl) on the sinter deposits there. Thermal infrared spectra of these samples provide the best match yet to spectra from Spirit's Mini-TES instrument due in part to the halite. A feature near 1260 cm-1 in some Mini-TES spectra of Home Plate silica outcrops is only present in lab measurements of opal-A when viewed at high emission angles (Fig. 2a). Although the mast-mounted configuration of Mini-TES led to an optical beam path that intersected horizontal surfaces at angles >40° from normal, in no case were the Home Plate silica outcrops smooth and flat lying, especially across the >10 cm diameter FOV. But the presence of thin halite crusts on silica sinter from El Tatio contributes to a ~1260 cm-1 independent of emission angle that better matches the magnitude of this feature in Mini-TES silica spectra (Fig. 2b) [1]. a	b	c	d	 Figure 2. (a) Mini-TES spectrum of Home Plate silica has a strong feature near 1260 cm-1 (vertical line), which is present in lab spectra of opal-A only at high emission angles. (b) Mini-TES spectra (black and green) match halite encrusted El Tatio sinter (red and blue) independent of emission angle. The digitate structures among some of the Home Plate silica outcrops have notably similar morphology to silica sinter forming in hot spring/geyser discharge channels at El Tatio (Fig. 3). The digitate silica structures at El Tatio that most closely resemble those at Home Plate are biomediated microstromatolites, complex sedimentary structures produced by a combination of biotic and abiotic processes. Although fully abiotic processes are not ruled out for the Home Plate silica structures, they satisfy an a priori definition of potential biosignatures [1].  ! Figure 3. Digitate silica structures at Home Plate (top; Pancam sol 1160, P2582) and in El Tatio hot spring discharge channel (bottom). Insets highlight notably similar features. Scale bar is 5 cm in both images. Even if Home Plate digitate silica structures arose from purely abiotic processes, evidence supporting an origin as sinter deposits is robust. Among the silicarich materials examined with Spirit's arm-mounted instruments are rocks intentionally disturbed with the rover's wheel (whitish hues in the Pancam inset of Fig. 1). They display textures consistent with those of sinter deposits, including the most common type, sinter breccia, which is produced from reworked pebbles of older, locally derived volcanic rocks and fragments of silica sinter (Fig. 4a,b). Breccias that line channel floors and margins provide the substrate upon which digitate structures form [1]. Importantly, sinter breccia at El Tatio captures and preserves microbial materials, even outside of discharge channels (Fig. 4c).  !" #" $" Figure 4. (a) As viewed by Spirit's Microscopic Imager (sol 1291), disturbed silica rocks have internal texture like that of El Tatio sinter breccia (b) at same scale (1 cm scale bar). (c) A scanning electron microscope view of (b) shows preserved diatoms and tubular structures that likely are silicified exopolymer sheaths. Conclusions: Opaline silica rocks and outcrops adjacent to Home Plate occur in a volcanic hydrothermal environment and display nodular and digitate structures, internal textures, and evidence of halite crusts that all are consistent with sinter deposits like those of El Tatio, Chile. Sinter deposits are well suited for the capture and preservation of microbial materials. Thus, the silica deposits at Home Plate can be viewed as ideal candidates for biosignature capture and preservation independent of the potential origin of their digitate structures as biomediated microstromatolites. References: [1] Ruff, S. W., and J. D. Farmer (2016), Nat. Commun., 7, 10.1038/ncomms13554. [2] Squyres, S. W., et al. (2008), Science, 320, 10631067, 10.1126/science.1155429. [3] Farmer, J. D., and D. J. Des Marais (1999), J. Geophys. Res., 104, E11, 26977-26995.  
