 TRAVERSABILITY STUDY OF JEZERO CRATER USING COMPARATIVE ORBITAL AND GROUNDBASED IMAGE ANALYSIS OF MER AND MSL ROVER TRAVERSES. E. Harris1 and D. J. P. Martin2, 1Lancaster University, Bailrigg, Lancaster, UK, LA1 4YW.  2European Space Agency ECSAT, Fermi Avenue, Harwell Campus, Didcot, UK, OX11 0FD. (emma.harris97@outlook.com)   Introduction:  Jezero crater (18°N, 77°E) is the future landing site of NASA's Mars2020 rover [1] which will initiate the globally collaborative Mars Sample Return campaign (MSR). The western region of Jezero crater has been confirmed as the landing site for Mars2020 as the prominent alluvial fan indicates ancient water flow, and spectral data derived from the Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM) has identified minerals associated with water alteration [2] making this an ideal location in the search for evidence of past life. The European Space Agency's Sample Fetch Rover (SFR) is an integral part of MSR: it will collect the sample tubes deposited by the Mars2020 rover and return them to the launch vehicle, enabling their launch to Mars orbit and, following a rendezvous with ESA's Earth Return Orbiter, be returned to Earth. Therefore, a traversability analysis of Jezero is required to determine the hazards that SFR may encounter.  From past Mars exploration it is known that rovers are most likely to traverse regolith. The terrain, therefore, has been classified into 16 definitions derived from [3] and includes smooth, fractured and rough terrains along with multiple sand ripple classifications as opposed to geological classifications of the bedrock.  Overview of study methods: Terrain analysis utilized High Resolution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE) orbital images (25 cm/px) of the Mars2020 landing site region. We compared these HiRISE images with ground-based images obtained by MER Spirit & Opportunity and MSL Curiosity - at Gusev crater, Meridiani Planum and Gale crater respectively - and found areas of similar terrain have previously been traversed by rovers. Modified slope data and use of a Digital Terrain Model (DTM) provided increased confidence in the determination and distinction of safe and hazardous terrain from orbit. Additionally, the slope and DTM datasets were used to investigate the traversability of specific features, such as fractures and ripples, by creating vertical terrain profiles using GIS software (Fig. 1 and 3).  Ground based rover images were sought from NASA public databases [4-5] and were correlated with locations on HiRISE images using detailed NASA traverse maps which display high resolution locations of the rovers on specific sols.  Results: Features in Jezero are often magnitudinally wider than similar features previously traversed.  Safe terrain: Smooth regolith is deemed the safest terrain type and can be found throughout the study area. Large fractures ≤15 m wide were frequently noted to appear in this terrain (Fig. 1) in some cases the fractures were seen occurring circumferentially and occasionally in a radial pattern from small impact craters. Use of vertical terrain profiling within GIS software utilized the information within the DTM to show that the largest fracture in the terrain has a depth of ~20 cm and thus, in theory, should be traversable for the rover.  Due to the limitations of the current orbital data, the depth and physical properties of the regolith that is at least partially infilling the fractures is still unknown. There is a chance that this infilling material is an aeolian deposit possibly with a low cohesivity, causing a deep sand deposit analogous to Spirit's final resting place; an ~8 m diameter crater known as Troy. Smooth regolith visually similar from orbit within Eagle crater was traversed by Opportunity from thr rover's initial landing site but was hazardous with 100% slip seen on 17° slopes [8]. However, Curiosity rover was able to successfully traverse 25° slopes on smooth regolith near Vera Rubin Ridge (VRR) [6].  The aeolian regimes of these varying locations may have an influence on the depth and physical properties of the regolith. Understanding the varying physical properties of duricrust - the cemented layer of regolith on Mars that behaves in a brittle manner and can easily be destroyed by low surface pressures [7] - could be vital to safe traversability of smooth regolith. Whilst the depth of the regolith is a factor almost impossible to calculate from orbital images alone at this time, past environmental conditions may suggest at the material beneath the duricrust. For example, the sulphate-bearing Fig. 1 -  Fractures within areas of smooth regolith in Jezero crater. The vertical terrain profile, created in QGIS The X and Y axes increments represents 2 m and 20 cm respectively. Vertical error of ± 1 m due to the DTM. Vertical error of ± 1 m due to the DTM. regolith beneath the thin duricrust at Troy lacked strength and cohesivity causing high levels wheel sink; the area has been interpreted as a pyroclastic deposit [8]. Hazardous terrain: Sand ripples can be found readily dispersed across the landing site at Jezero crater as shown in Fig. 2. Polygonal and dense linear ripples are fairly unique to the western edge of the landing area; suggesting these features are Transverse Aeolian Ridges (TARs) [9]. Fig. 3 shows the amplitude of these ripples as ~1 m; any traverses towards the western rim of Jezero crater (e.g. towards Midway) may carry a significant risk due to the dense nature of these hazardous ripples.  Previous rover traverses over sand ripple terrains have had variable levels of success. Curiosity rover was able to successfully traverse a ripple known as Dingo Gap on sol 533 with a wavelength of ~7 m and an amplitude of ~1 m. Dingo gap ripple is possibly analogous in size to the TAR ripples in the south-west of the landing area but the high density of these ripples in Jezero would make the terrain almost impossible to traverse successfully. Dense, polygonal ripples caused Opportunity rover to get stuck on sol 446 when all 6 wheels sank into the regolith of a ripple with an amplitude of ~30 cm. Curiosity's wheels sank 18 cm into polygonal ripples on a 3° slope proving that polygonal ripples are not safe for traverse. This suggests that slope data needs to be considered with a higher regard within the study of sand ripple terrain traversability.  Rock fields are potentially hazardous terrain, but it is hard to establish the quantity of rocks that a rover would have to traverse due to the 25 cm resolution of HiRISE images. Whilst the number of rocks <25 cm can be determined statistically from the quantity of rocks seen in orbital images (i.e. via Cumulative Fractional Area of rocks, or CFA), it is usually an underestimate.  However, an estimate of the number of rocks is required in order to determine the potential for damage to rover wheels. Curiosity rover saw this problem when traversing a rock field where multiple punctures and cracks formed in the wheels due to the angular rocky terrain [10]. Spirit rover traversed terrain deemed as rough regolith from orbit but instead found an abundance of angular rocks too small to be seen from orbit.  Further research: The physical properties of duricrust and how this can differ in various geologic environments is an important factor when studying traversability; future research will focus on the creation of appropriate terrestrial analogs to test rovers prior to a mission. Autonomous rover driving capabilities are key to the future of Mars rover missions and will vary due to the level of hazard posed by each terrain type. Adding another dimension to the terrain allocation to include a higher level of description, perhaps including terrestrial or previously traversed Martian terrain, would allow geologists and engineers alike to base traversability on rover capabilities for differing terrain types.  References:  [1] NASA (2019) https://www.nasa.gov/imagefeature/jezero-crater-mars-2020s-landing-site [2] Fassett C L et al., (2007) AGU abstract id.P13D-1562 [3] Rothrock et al., (2016) American Institute of Aeronautics & Astronautics. [4] NASA MSL Curiosity Multimedia (2019) mars.nasa.gov/msl/multimedia/images [5] NASA MER Multimedia (2019) https://mars.nasa.gov/mer/multimedia/raw/ [6] Reference for steep tilt for Curiosity. [7] Lewinger et al., (2018) Acta Astronautica. 152. 567-579. [8] Filibetro and Schwenzer (2013) Meteoritics & Planetary Sci 48. [9] Day and Dorn (2019) Geophys. Res. Letters. 40 (6) [10] Ardvison et al (2017) Journal of Terramechanics. 73.  Fig. 2 - HiRISE image of Jezero landing site annotated with the four sand ripple terrain types. Blue = sparse and moderate ripples on a firm substrate; Green = sparse and moderate ripples on a sandy substrate; Purple = polygonal ripples; Red = dense linear ripples. Fig. 3 - Vertical terrain profile, created from a HiRISE DTM,  showing the amplitude of the sand ripples in the south-west of Jezero crater landing ellipse. The X and Y axes increments represent 20 m and 1 m respectively.  
